Day 142:

Reading Job, chapters ['41', '42']:

  Chapter 41.

    1: 1 
Whoever might vainly hope to do so
    need only see him to be overthrown.

    2: 
No one is fierce enough to arouse him;
    who then dares stand before me?

    3: 
    4: 
1 
Whoever might vainly hope to do so
    need only see him to be overthrown.
2 
No one is fierce enough to arouse him;
    who then dares stand before me?
3 
Whoever has assailed me, I will pay back—
    Everything under the heavens is mine.
4 
I need hardly mention his limbs,
    his strength, and the fitness of his equipment.

    5: 
Who can strip off his outer garment,
    or penetrate his double armor?

    6: 
Who can force open the doors of his face,
    close to his terrible teeth?

    7: 
Rows of scales are on his back,
    tightly sealed together;

    8: 
They are fitted so close to each other
    that no air can come between them;

    9: So joined to one another
    that they hold fast and cannot be parted.

    10: 
When he sneezes, light flashes forth;
    his eyes are like the eyelids of the dawn.

    11: 
Out of his mouth go forth torches;
    sparks of fire leap forth.

    12: 
From his nostrils comes smoke
    as from a seething pot or bowl.

    13: 
His breath sets coals afire;
    a flame comes from his mouth.

    14: 
Strength abides in his neck,
    and power leaps before him.

    15: 
The folds of his flesh stick together,
    it is cast over him and immovable.

    16: 
His heart is cast as hard as stone;
    cast as the lower millstone.

    17: 
When he rises up, the gods are afraid;
    when he crashes down, they fall back.

    18: 
Should a sword reach him, it will not avail;
    nor will spear, dart, or javelin.

    19: 
He regards iron as chaff,
    and bronze as rotten wood.

    20: 
No arrow will put him to flight;
    slingstones used against him are but straw.

    21: 
Clubs he regards as straw;
    he laughs at the crash of the spear.

    22: 
Under him are sharp pottery fragments,
    spreading a threshing sledge upon the mire.

    23: 
He makes the depths boil like a pot;
    he makes the sea like a perfume bottle.

    24: 
Behind him he leaves a shining path;
    you would think the deep had white hair.

    25: 
Upon the earth there is none like him,
    he was made fearless.

    26: 
He looks over all who are haughty,
    he is king over all proud beasts.
New American Bible (Revised Edition) (NABRE)
Scripture texts, prefaces, introductions, footnotes and cross references used in this work are taken from the New American Bible, revised edition © 2010, 1991, 1986, 1970 Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, DC All Rights Reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the copyright owner.

  Chapter 42.

    1: 
    2: 1 Then Job answered the Lord and said:
2 
I know that you can do all things,
    and that no purpose of yours can be hindered.

    3: 
    4: 
1 Then Job answered the Lord and said:
2 
I know that you can do all things,
    and that no purpose of yours can be hindered.
3 
“Who is this who obscures counsel with ignorance?”
I have spoken but did not understand;
    things too marvelous for me, which I did not know.
4 
“Listen, and I will speak;
I will question you, and you tell me the answers.”

    5: 
By hearsay I had heard of you,
    but now my eye has seen you.

    6: 
Therefore I disown what I have said,
    and repent in dust and ashes.
IX. Epilogue
Job’s Restoration. 
    7: And after the Lord had spoken these words to Job, the Lord said to Eliphaz the Temanite, “My anger blazes against you and your two friends! You have not spoken rightly concerning me, as has my servant Job. 
    8: So now take seven bulls and seven rams, and go to my servant Job, and sacrifice a burnt offering for yourselves, and let my servant Job pray for you. To him I will show favor, and not punish your folly, for you have not spoken rightly concerning me, as has my servant Job.” 
    9: hen Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite, went and did as the Lord had commanded them. The Lord showed favor to Job.

    10: The Lord also restored the prosperity of Job, after he had prayed for his friends; the Lord even gave to Job twice as much as he had before. 
    11: Then all his brothers and sisters came to him, and all his former acquaintances, and they dined with him in his house. They consoled and comforted him for all the evil the Lord had brought upon him, and each one gave him a piece of money and a gold ring.

    12: Thus the Lord blessed the later days of Job more than his earlier ones. Now he had fourteen thousand sheep, six thousand camels, a thousand yoke of oxen, and a thousand she-donkeys. 
    13: He also had seven sons and three daughters: 
    14: the first daughter he called Jemimah, the second Keziah, and the third Keren-happuch. 
    15: In all the land no other women were as beautiful as the daughters of Job; and their father gave them an inheritance among their brothers.

    16: After this, Job lived a hundred and forty years; and he saw his children, his grandchildren, and even his great-grandchildren. 
    17: Then Job died, old and full of years.


End of day 142.