Day 300:

Reading John, chapters ['1', '2', '3', '4']:

  Chapter 1.

    1: 1 
In the beginning was the Word,
    and the Word was with God,
    and the Word was God.

    2: 
He was in the beginning with God.

    3: 
All things came to be through him,
    and without him nothing came to be.
What came to be 
    4: through him was life,
    and this life was the light of the human race;

    5: 
the light shines in the darkness,
    and the darkness has not overcome it.

    6: A man named John was sent from God. 
    7: He came for testimony, to testify to the light, so that all might believe through him. 
    8: He was not the light, but came to testify to the light. 
    9: he true light, which enlightens everyone, was coming into the world.

    10: 
He was in the world,
    and the world came to be through him,
    but the world did not know him.

    11: 
He came to what was his own,
    but his own people did not accept him.

    12: But to those who did accept him he gave power to become children of God, to those who believe in his name, 
    13: who were born not by natural generation nor by human choice nor by a man’s decision but of God.

    14: 
And the Word became flesh
    and made his dwelling among us,
    and we saw his glory,
    the glory as of the Father’s only Son,
    full of grace and truth.

    15: John testified to him and cried out, saying, “This was he of whom I said, ‘The one who is coming after me ranks ahead of me because he existed before me.’” 
    16: From his fullness we have all received, grace in place of grace, 
    17: because while the law was given through Moses, grace and truth came through Jesus Christ. 
    18: No one has ever seen God. The only Son, God, who is at the Father’s side, has revealed him.
II. The Book of Signs
John the Baptist’s Testimony to Himself. 
    19: And this is the testimony of John. When the Jews[n] from Jerusalem sent priests and Levites [to him] to ask him, “Who are you?” 
    20: he admitted and did not deny it, but admitted, “I am not the Messiah.” 
    21: So they asked him, “What are you then? Are you Elijah?” And he said, “I am not.” “Are you the Prophet?” He answered, “No.” 
    22: So they said to him, “Who are you, so we can give an answer to those who sent us? What do you have to say for yourself?” 
    23: He said:
“I am ‘the voice of one crying out in the desert,
“Make straight the way of the Lord,”’
as Isaiah the prophet said.” 
    24: Some Pharisees were also sent. 
    25: They asked him, “Why then do you baptize if you are not the Messiah or Elijah or the Prophet?” 
    26: John answered them, “I baptize with water; but there is one among you whom you do not recognize, 
    27: the one who is coming after me, whose sandal strap I am not worthy to untie.” 
    28: This happened in Bethany across the Jordan, where John was baptizing.
John the Baptist’s Testimony to Jesus. 
    29: The next day he saw Jesus coming toward him and said, “Behold, the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world. 
    30: He is the one of whom I said, ‘A man is coming after me who ranks ahead of me because he existed before me.’ 
    31: I did not know him, but the reason why I came baptizing with water was that he might be made known to Israel.” 
    32: John testified further, saying, “I saw the Spirit come down like a dove from the sky and remain upon him. 
    33: I did not know him, but the one who sent me to baptize with water told me, ‘On whomever you see the Spirit come down and remain, he is the one who will baptize with the holy Spirit.’ 
    34: Now I have seen and testified that he is the Son of God.”
The First Disciples. 
    35: The next day John was there again with two of his disciples, 
    36: and as he watched Jesus walk by, he said, “Behold, the Lamb of God.” 
    37: The two disciples heard what he said and followed Jesus. 
    38: Jesus turned and saw them following him and said to them, “What are you looking for?” They said to him, “Rabbi” (which translated means Teacher), “where are you staying?” 
    39: He said to them, “Come, and you will see.” So they went and saw where he was staying, and they stayed with him that day. It was about four in the afternoon. 
    40: Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, was one of the two who heard John and followed Jesus. 
    41: He first found his own brother Simon and told him, “We have found the Messiah” (which is translated Anointed). 
    42: Then he brought him to Jesus. Jesus looked at him and said, “You are Simon the son of John; you will be called Cephas” (which is translated Peter).

    43: The next day he decided to go to Galilee, and he found Philip. And Jesus said to him, “Follow me.” 
    44: Now Philip was from Bethsaida, the town of Andrew and Peter. 
    45: Philip found Nathanael and told him, “We have found the one about whom Moses wrote in the law, and also the prophets, Jesus son of Joseph, from Nazareth.” 
    46: But Nathanael said to him, “Can anything good come from Nazareth?” Philip said to him, “Come and see.” 
    47: Jesus saw Nathanael coming toward him and said of him, “Here is a true Israelite. There is no duplicity in him.” 
    48: Nathanael said to him, “How do you know me?” Jesus answered and said to him, “Before Philip called you, I saw you under the fig tree.” 
    49: Nathanael answered him, “Rabbi, you are the Son of God; you are the King of Israel.” 
    50: Jesus answered and said to him, “Do you believe because I told you that I saw you under the fig tree? You will see greater things than this.” 
    51: And he said to him, “Amen, amen, I say to you, you will see the sky opened and the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of Man.”


  Chapter 2.

    1: 
    2: The Wedding at Cana. 1 On the third day there was a wedding[b] in Cana[c] in Galilee, and the mother of Jesus was there. 2 Jesus and his disciples were also invited to the wedding. 
    3: When the wine ran short, the mother of Jesus said to him, “They have no wine.” 
    4: [And] Jesus said to her, “Woman, how does your concern affect me? My hour has not yet come.” 
    5: His mother said to the servers, “Do whatever he tells you.” 
    6: Now there were six stone water jars there for Jewish ceremonial washings, each holding twenty to thirty gallons. 
    7: Jesus told them, “Fill the jars with water.” So they filled them to the brim. 
    8: Then he told them, “Draw some out now and take it to the headwaiter.” So they took it. 
    9: nd when the headwaiter tasted the water that had become wine, without knowing where it came from (although the servers who had drawn the water knew), the headwaiter called the bridegroom 
    10: and said to him, “Everyone serves good wine first, and then when people have drunk freely, an inferior one; but you have kept the good wine until now.” 
    11: Jesus did this as the beginning of his signs in Cana in Galilee and so revealed his glory, and his disciples began to believe in him.

    12: After this, he and his mother, [his] brothers, and his disciples went down to Capernaum and stayed there only a few days.[i]
Cleansing of the Temple. 
    13: Since the Passover[k] of the Jews was near, Jesus went up to Jerusalem. 
    14: He found in the temple area those who sold oxen, sheep, and doves,[m] as well as the money-changers seated there. 
    15: He made a whip out of cords and drove them all out of the temple area, with the sheep and oxen, and spilled the coins of the money-changers and overturned their tables, 
    16: and to those who sold doves he said, “Take these out of here, and stop making my Father’s house a marketplace.” 
    17: His disciples recalled the words of scripture, “Zeal for your house will consume me.” 
    18: At this the Jews answered and said to him, “What sign can you show us for doing this?” 
    19: Jesus answered and said to them, “Destroy this temple and in three days I will raise it up.” 
    20: The Jews said, “This temple has been under construction for forty-six years, and you will raise it up in three days?” 
    21: But he was speaking about the temple of his body. 
    22: Therefore, when he was raised from the dead, his disciples remembered that he had said this, and they came to believe the scripture and the word Jesus had spoken.

    23: While he was in Jerusalem for the feast of Passover, many began to believe in his name when they saw the signs he was doing. 
    24: But Jesus would not trust himself to them because he knew them all, 
    25: and did not need anyone to testify about human nature. He himself understood it well.


  Chapter 3.

    1: Now there was a Pharisee named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews. 
    2: 
    3: Nicodemus. 1 Now there was a Pharisee named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews.[b] 2 He came to Jesus at night and said to him, “Rabbi, we know that you are a teacher who has come from God, for no one can do these signs that you are doing unless God is with him.” 3 Jesus answered and said to him, “Amen, amen, I say to you, no one can see the kingdom of God without being born[c] from above.” 
    4: Nicodemus said to him, “How can a person once grown old be born again? Surely he cannot reenter his mother’s womb and be born again, can he?” 
    5: Jesus answered, “Amen, amen, I say to you, no one can enter the kingdom of God without being born of water and Spirit. 
    6: What is born of flesh is flesh and what is born of spirit is spirit. 
    7: Do not be amazed that I told you, ‘You must be born from above.’ 
    8: The wind blows where it wills, and you can hear the sound it makes, but you do not know where it comes from or where it goes; so it is with everyone who is born of the Spirit.” 
    9: icodemus answered and said to him, “How can this happen?” 
    10: Jesus answered and said to him, “You are the teacher of Israel and you do not understand this? 
    11: Amen, amen, I say to you, we speak of what we know and we testify to what we have seen, but you people do not accept our testimony. 
    12: If I tell you about earthly things and you do not believe, how will you believe if I tell you about heavenly things? 
    13: No one has gone up to heaven except the one who has come down from heaven, the Son of Man. 
    14: And just as Moses lifted up the serpent in the desert, so must the Son of Man be lifted up, 
    15: so that everyone who believes in him may have eternal life.”

    16: For God so loved the world that he gave his only Son, so that everyone who believes in him might not perish but might have eternal life. 
    17: For God did not send his Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the world might be saved through him. 
    18: Whoever believes in him will not be condemned, but whoever does not believe has already been condemned, because he has not believed in the name of the only Son of God. 
    19: And this is the verdict, that the light came into the world, but people preferred darkness to light, because their works were evil. 
    20: For everyone who does wicked things hates the light and does not come toward the light, so that his works might not be exposed. 
    21: But whoever lives the truth comes to the light, so that his works may be clearly seen as done in God.
Final Witness of the Baptist. 
    22: After this, Jesus and his disciples went into the region of Judea, where he spent some time with them baptizing. 
    23: John was also baptizing in Aenon near Salim, because there was an abundance of water there, and people came to be baptized, 
    24: for John had not yet been imprisoned. 
    25: Now a dispute arose between the disciples of John and a Jew about ceremonial washings. 
    26: So they came to John and said to him, “Rabbi, the one who was with you across the Jordan, to whom you testified, here he is baptizing and everyone is coming to him.” 
    27: John answered and said, “No one can receive anything except what has been given him from heaven. 
    28: You yourselves can testify that I said  I am not the Messiah, but that I was sent before him. 
    29: The one who has the bride is the bridegroom; the best man, who stands and listens to him, rejoices greatly at the bridegroom’s voice. So this joy of mine has been made complete. 
    30: He must increase; I must decrease.”
The One from Heaven. 
    31: The one who comes from above is above all. The one who is of the earth is earthly and speaks of earthly things. But the one who comes from heaven . 
    32: He testifies to what he has seen and heard, but no one accepts his testimony. 
    33: Whoever does accept his testimony certifies that God is trustworthy. 
    34: For the one whom God sent speaks the words of God. He does not ration his gift of the Spirit. 
    35: The Father loves the Son and has given everything over to him. 
    36: Whoever believes in the Son has eternal life, but whoever disobeys the Son will not see life, but the wrath of God remains upon him.


  Chapter 4.

    1: Now when Jesus learned that the Pharisees had heard that Jesus was making and baptizing more disciples than John 
    2: (although Jesus himself was not baptizing, just his disciples), 
    3: 
    4: 1 Now when Jesus learned that the Pharisees had heard that Jesus was making and baptizing more disciples than John 2 (although Jesus himself was not baptizing, just his disciples),[b] 3 he left Judea and returned to Galilee.
The Samaritan Woman. 4 He had to[c] pass through Samaria. 
    5: So he came to a town of Samaria called Sychar, near the plot of land that Jacob had given to his son Joseph. 
    6: Jacob’s well was there. Jesus, tired from his journey, sat down there at the well. It was about noon.

    7: A woman of Samaria came to draw water. Jesus said to her, “Give me a drink.” 
    8: His disciples had gone into the town to buy food. 
    9: e]The Samaritan woman said to him, “How can you, a Jew, ask me, a Samaritan woman, for a drink?” (For Jews use nothing in common with Samaritans.) 
    10: Jesus answered and said to her, “If you knew the gift of God and who is saying to you, ‘Give me a drink,’ you would have asked him and he would have given you living water.” 
    11:  said to him, “Sir,[g] you do not even have a bucket and the well is deep; where then can you get this living water? 
    12: Are you greater than our father Jacob, who gave us this well and drank from it himself with his children and his flocks?” 
    13: Jesus answered and said to her, “Everyone who drinks this water will be thirsty again; 
    14: but whoever drinks the water I shall give will never thirst; the water I shall give will become in him a spring of water welling up to eternal life.” 
    15: The woman said to him, “Sir, give me this water, so that I may not be thirsty or have to keep coming here to draw water.”

    16: Jesus said to her, “Go call your husband and come back.” 
    17: The woman answered and said to him, “I do not have a husband.” Jesus answered her, “You are right in saying, ‘I do not have a husband.’ 
    18: For you have had five husbands, and the one you have now is not your husband. What you have said is true.” 
    19: The woman said to him, “Sir, I can see that you are a prophet. 
    20: Our ancestors worshiped on this mountain; but you people say that the place to worship is in Jerusalem.” 
    21: Jesus said to her, “Believe me, woman, the hour is coming when you will worship the Father neither on this mountain nor in Jerusalem. 
    22: You people worship what you do not understand; we worship what we understand, because salvation is from the Jews. 
    23: But the hour is coming, and is now here, when true worshipers will worship the Father in Spirit and truth; and indeed the Father seeks such people to worship him. 
    24: God is Spirit, and those who worship him must worship in Spirit and truth.” 
    25: The woman said to him, “I know that the Messiah is coming, the one called the Anointed; when he comes, he will tell us everything.” 
    26: Jesus said to her, “I am he, the one who is speaking with you.”

    27: At that moment his disciples returned, and were amazed that he was talking with a woman, but still no one said, “What are you looking for?” or “Why are you talking with her?” 
    28: The woman left her water jar and went into the town and said to the people, 
    29: “Come see a man who told me everything I have done. Could he possibly be the Messiah?” 
    30: They went out of the town and came to him. 
    31: Meanwhile, the disciples urged him, “Rabbi, eat.” 
    32: But he said to them, “I have food to eat of which you do not know.” 
    33: So the disciples said to one another, “Could someone have brought him something to eat?” 
    34: Jesus said to them, “My food is to do the will of the one who sent me and to finish his work. 
    35: Do you not say, ‘In four months the harvest will be here’? I tell you, look up and see the fields ripe for the harvest. 
    36: The reaper is already receiving his payment and gathering crops for eternal life, so that the sower and reaper can rejoice together. 
    37: For here the saying is verified that ‘One sows and another reaps.’ 
    38: I sent you to reap what you have not worked for; others have done the work, and you are sharing the fruits of their work.”

    39: Many of the Samaritans of that town began to believe in him because of the word of the woman who testified, “He told me everything I have done.” 
    40: When the Samaritans came to him, they invited him to stay with them; and he stayed there two days. 
    41: Many more began to believe in him because of his word, 
    42: and they said to the woman, “We no longer believe because of your word; for we have heard for ourselves, and we know that this is truly the savior of the world.”
Return to Galilee. 
    43: After the two days, he left there for Galilee. 
    44: For Jesus himself testified that a prophet has no honor in his native place. 
    45: When he came into Galilee, the Galileans welcomed him, since they had seen all he had done in Jerusalem at the feast; for they themselves had gone to the feast.
Second Sign at Cana. 
    46: Then he returned to Cana in Galilee, where he had made the water wine. Now there was a royal official whose son was ill in Capernaum. 
    47: When he heard that Jesus had arrived in Galilee from Judea, he went to him and asked him to come down and heal his son, who was near death. 
    48: Jesus said to him, “Unless you people see signs and wonders, you will not believe.” 
    49: The royal official said to him, “Sir, come down before my child dies.” 
    50: Jesus said to him, “You may go; your son will live.” The man believed what Jesus said to him and left. 
    51: While he was on his way back, his slaves met him and told him that his boy would live. 
    52: He asked them when he began to recover. They told him, “The fever left him yesterday, about one in the afternoon.” 
    53: The father realized that just at that time Jesus had said to him, “Your son will live,” and he and his whole household came to believe. 
    54:  this was the second sign Jesus did when he came to Galilee from Judea.


End of day 300.