Day 299:

Reading Luke, chapters ['21', '22', '23', '24']:

  Chapter 21.

    1: 
    2: 
The Poor Widow’s Contribution. 1 When he looked up he saw some wealthy people putting their offerings into the treasury 2 and he noticed a poor widow putting in two small coins. 
    3: He said, “I tell you truly, this poor widow put in more than all the rest; 
    4: for those others have all made offerings from their surplus wealth, but she, from her poverty, has offered her whole livelihood.”
The Destruction of the Temple Foretold. 
    5: While some people were speaking about how the temple was adorned with costly stones and votive offerings, he said, 
    6: “All that you see here—the days will come when there will not be left a stone upon another stone that will not be thrown down.”
The Signs of the End. 
    7: Then they asked him, “Teacher, when will this happen? And what sign will there be when all these things are about to happen?” 
    8: He answered, “See that you not be deceived, for many will come in my name, saying, ‘I am he,’ and ‘The time has come.’ Do not follow them! 
    9: hen you hear of wars and insurrections, do not be terrified; for such things must happen first, but it will not immediately be the end.” 
    10: Then he said to them, “Nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom. 
    11: There will be powerful earthquakes, famines, and plagues from place to place; and awesome sights and mighty signs will come from the sky.
The Coming Persecution. 
    12: “Before all this happens, however, they will seize and persecute you, they will hand you over to the synagogues and to prisons, and they will have you led before kings and governors because of my name. 
    13: It will lead to your giving testimony. 
    14: Remember, you are not to prepare your defense beforehand, 
    15: for I myself shall give you a wisdom in speaking that all your adversaries will be powerless to resist or refute. 
    16: You will even be handed over by parents, brothers, relatives, and friends, and they will put some of you to death. 
    17: You will be hated by all because of my name, 
    18: but not a hair on your head will be destroyed. 
    19: By your perseverance you will secure your lives.
The Great Tribulation. 
    20: 
    21: The Poor Widow’s Contribution. 1 When he looked up he saw some wealthy people putting their offerings into the treasury 2 and he noticed a poor widow putting in two small coins. 3 He said, “I tell you truly, this poor widow put in more than all the rest; 4 for those others have all made offerings from their surplus wealth, but she, from her poverty, has offered her whole livelihood.”
The Destruction of the Temple Foretold. 5 [b]While some people were speaking about how the temple was adorned with costly stones and votive offerings, he said, 6 “All that you see here—the days will come when there will not be left a stone upon another stone that will not be thrown down.”
The Signs of the End. 7 Then they asked him, “Teacher, when will this happen? And what sign will there be when all these things are about to happen?” 8 He answered, “See that you not be deceived, for many will come in my name, saying, ‘I am he,’ and ‘The time has come.’[c] Do not follow them! 9 When you hear of wars and insurrections, do not be terrified; for such things must happen first, but it will not immediately be the end.” 10 Then he said to them, “Nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom. 11 There will be powerful earthquakes, famines, and plagues from place to place; and awesome sights and mighty signs will come from the sky.
The Coming Persecution. 12 “Before all this happens,[d] however, they will seize and persecute you, they will hand you over to the synagogues and to prisons, and they will have you led before kings and governors because of my name. 13 It will lead to your giving testimony. 14 Remember, you are not to prepare your defense beforehand, 15 for I myself shall give you a wisdom in speaking[e] that all your adversaries will be powerless to resist or refute. 16 You will even be handed over by parents, brothers, relatives, and friends, and they will put some of you to death. 17 You will be hated by all because of my name, 18 but not a hair on your head will be destroyed. 19 By your perseverance you will secure your lives.
The Great Tribulation.[f] 20 “When you see Jerusalem surrounded by armies, know that its desolation is at hand. 21 Then those in Judea must flee to the mountains. Let those within the city escape from it, and let those in the countryside not enter the city, 
    22: for these days are the time of punishment when all the scriptures are fulfilled. 
    23: Woe to pregnant women and nursing mothers in those days, for a terrible calamity will come upon the earth and a wrathful judgment upon this people. 
    24: They will fall by the edge of the sword and be taken as captives to all the Gentiles; and Jerusalem will be trampled underfoot by the Gentiles until the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled.
The Coming of the Son of Man. 
    25: “There will be signs in the sun, the moon, and the stars, and on earth nations will be in dismay, perplexed by the roaring of the sea and the waves. 
    26: People will die of fright in anticipation of what is coming upon the world, for the powers of the heavens will be shaken. 
    27: And then they will see the Son of Man coming in a cloud with power and great glory. 
    28: But when these signs begin to happen, stand erect and raise your heads because your redemption is at hand.”
The Lesson of the Fig Tree. 
    29: He taught them a lesson. “Consider the fig tree and all the other trees. 
    30: When their buds burst open, you see for yourselves and know that summer is now near; 
    31: in the same way, when you see these things happening, know that the kingdom of God is near. 
    32: Amen, I say to you, this generation will not pass away until all these things have taken place. 
    33: Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will not pass away.
Exhortation to Be Vigilant. 
    34: “Beware that your hearts do not become drowsy from carousing and drunkenness and the anxieties of daily life, and that day catch you by surprise 
    35: like a trap. For that day will assault everyone who lives on the face of the earth. 
    36: Be vigilant at all times and pray that you have the strength to escape the tribulations that are imminent and to stand before the Son of Man.”
Ministry in Jerusalem. 
    37: During the day, Jesus was teaching in the temple area, but at night he would leave and stay at the place called the Mount of Olives. 
    38: And all the people would get up early each morning to listen to him in the temple area.


  Chapter 22.

    1: 
    2: 
The Conspiracy Against Jesus. 1 Now the feast of Unleavened Bread, called the Passover, was drawing near, 2 and the chief priests and the scribes were seeking a way to put him to death, for they were afraid of the people. 
    3: Then Satan entered into Judas, the one surnamed Iscariot, who was counted among the Twelve, 
    4: and he went to the chief priests and temple guards to discuss a plan for handing him over to them. 
    5: They were pleased and agreed to pay him money. 
    6: He accepted their offer and sought a favorable opportunity to hand him over to them in the absence of a crowd.
Preparations for the Passover. 
    7: When the day of the feast of Unleavened Bread arrived, the day for sacrificing the Passover lamb, 
    8: he sent out Peter and John, instructing them, “Go and make preparations for us to eat the Passover.” 
    9: hey asked him, “Where do you want us to make the preparations?” 
    10: And he answered them, “When you go into the city, a man will meet you carrying a jar of water. Follow him into the house that he enters 
    11: and say to the master of the house, ‘The teacher says to you, “Where is the guest room where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?”’ 
    12: He will show you a large upper room that is furnished. Make the preparations there.” 
    13: Then they went off and found everything exactly as he had told them, and there they prepared the Passover.
The Last Supper. 
    14: When the hour came, he took his place at table with the apostles. 
    15: He said to them, “I have eagerly desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer, 
    16: for, I tell you, I shall not eat it  until there is fulfillment in the kingdom of God.” 
    17: Then he took a cup, gave thanks, and said, “Take this and share it among yourselves; 
    18: for I tell you  from this time on I shall not drink of the fruit of the vine until the kingdom of God comes.” 
    19: Then he took the bread, said the blessing, broke it, and gave it to them, saying, “This is my body, which will be given for you; do this in memory of me.” 
    20: And likewise the cup after they had eaten, saying, “This cup is the new covenant in my blood, which will be shed for you.
The Betrayal Foretold. 
    21: 
    22: The Conspiracy Against Jesus. 1 Now the feast of Unleavened Bread, called the Passover, was drawing near, 2 and the chief priests and the scribes were seeking a way to put him to death, for they were afraid of the people. 3 Then Satan entered into Judas,[c] the one surnamed Iscariot, who was counted among the Twelve, 4 and he went to the chief priests and temple guards to discuss a plan for handing him over to them. 5 They were pleased and agreed to pay him money. 6 He accepted their offer and sought a favorable opportunity to hand him over to them in the absence of a crowd.
Preparations for the Passover. 7 When the day of the feast of Unleavened Bread arrived, the day for sacrificing the Passover lamb, 8 he sent out Peter and John, instructing them, “Go and make preparations for us to eat the Passover.” 9 They asked him, “Where do you want us to make the preparations?” 10 And he answered them, “When you go into the city, a man will meet you carrying a jar of water.[d] Follow him into the house that he enters 11 and say to the master of the house, ‘The teacher says to you, “Where is the guest room where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?”’ 12 He will show you a large upper room that is furnished. Make the preparations there.” 13 Then they went off and found everything exactly as he had told them, and there they prepared the Passover.
The Last Supper. 14 When the hour came, he took his place at table with the apostles. 15 He said to them, “I have eagerly desired to eat this Passover[e] with you before I suffer, 16 for, I tell you, I shall not eat it [again] until there is fulfillment in the kingdom of God.” 17 Then he took a cup,[f] gave thanks, and said, “Take this and share it among yourselves; 18 for I tell you [that] from this time on I shall not drink of the fruit of the vine until the kingdom of God comes.” 19 [g]Then he took the bread, said the blessing, broke it, and gave it to them, saying, “This is my body, which will be given for you; do this in memory of me.” 20 And likewise the cup after they had eaten, saying, “This cup is the new covenant in my blood, which will be shed for you.
The Betrayal Foretold. 21 “And yet behold, the hand of the one who is to betray me is with me on the table; 22 for the Son of Man indeed goes as it has been determined; but woe to that man by whom he is betrayed.” 
    23: And they began to debate among themselves who among them would do such a deed.
The Role of the Disciples. 
    24: Then an argument broke out among them about which of them should be regarded as the greatest. 
    25: He said to them, “The kings of the Gentiles lord it over them and those in authority over them are addressed as ‘Benefactors’; 
    26: but among you it shall not be so. Rather, let the greatest among you be as the youngest, and the leader as the servant. 
    27: For who is greater: the one seated at table or the one who serves? Is it not the one seated at table? I am among you as the one who serves. 
    28: It is you who have stood by me in my trials; 
    29: and I confer a kingdom on you, just as my Father has conferred one on me, 
    30: that you may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom; and you will sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
Peter’s Denial Foretold. 
    31: “Simon, Simon, behold Satan has demanded to sift all of you[k] like wheat, 
    32: but I have prayed that your own faith may not fail; and once you have turned back, you must strengthen your brothers.” 
    33: He said to him, “Lord, I am prepared to go to prison and to die with you.” 
    34: But he replied, “I tell you, Peter, before the cock crows this day, you will deny three times that you know me.”
Instructions for the Time of Crisis. 
    35: He said to them, “When I sent you forth without a money bag or a sack or sandals, were you in need of anything?” “No, nothing,” they replied. 
    36: He said to them, “But now one who has a money bag should take it, and likewise a sack, and one who does not have a sword should sell his cloak and buy one. 
    37: For I tell you that this scripture must be fulfilled in me, namely, ‘He was counted among the wicked’; and indeed what is written about me is coming to fulfillment.” 
    38: Then they said, “Lord, look, there are two swords here.” But he replied, “It is enough!”
The Agony in the Garden. 
    39: Then going out he went, as was his custom, to the Mount of Olives, and the disciples followed him. 
    40: When he arrived at the place he said to them, “Pray that you may not undergo the test.” 
    41: After withdrawing about a stone’s throw from them and kneeling, he prayed, 
    42: saying, “Father, if you are willing, take this cup away from me; still, not my will but yours be done.”  
    43: And to strengthen him an angel from heaven appeared to him. 
    44: He was in such agony and he prayed so fervently that his sweat became like drops of blood falling on the ground.] 
    45: When he rose from prayer and returned to his disciples, he found them sleeping from grief. 
    46: He said to them, “Why are you sleeping? Get up and pray that you may not undergo the test.”
The Betrayal and Arrest of Jesus. 
    47: While he was still speaking, a crowd approached and in front was one of the Twelve, a man named Judas. He went up to Jesus to kiss him. 
    48: Jesus said to him, “Judas, are you betraying the Son of Man with a kiss?” 
    49: His disciples realized what was about to happen, and they asked, “Lord, shall we strike with a sword?” 
    50: And one of them struck the high priest’s servant and cut off his right ear. 
    51: But Jesus said in reply, “Stop, no more of this!” Then he touched the servant’s ear and healed him. 
    52: And Jesus said to the chief priests and temple guards and elders who had come for him, “Have you come out as against a robber, with swords and clubs? 
    53: Day after day I was with you in the temple area, and you did not seize me; but this is your hour, the time for the power of darkness.”
Peter’s Denial of Jesus. 
    54: After arresting him they led him away and took him into the house of the high priest; Peter was following at a distance. 
    55: They lit a fire in the middle of the courtyard and sat around it, and Peter sat down with them. 
    56: When a maid saw him seated in the light, she looked intently at him and said, “This man too was with him.” 
    57: But he denied it saying, “Woman, I do not know him.” 
    58: A short while later someone else saw him and said, “You too are one of them”; but Peter answered, “My friend, I am not.” 
    59: About an hour later, still another insisted, “Assuredly, this man too was with him, for he also is a Galilean.” 
    60: But Peter said, “My friend, I do not know what you are talking about.” Just as he was saying this, the cock crowed, 
    61: and the Lord turned and looked at Peter; and Peter remembered the word of the Lord, how he had said to him, “Before the cock crows today, you will deny me three times.” 
    62: He went out and began to weep bitterly. 
    63: The men who held Jesus in custody were ridiculing and beating him. 
    64: They blindfolded him and questioned him, saying, “Prophesy! Who is it that struck you?” 
    65: And they reviled him in saying many other things against him.
Jesus Before the Sanhedrin. 
    66: When day came the council of elders of the people met, both chief priests and scribes, and they brought him before their Sanhedrin. 
    67: They said, “If you are the Messiah, tell us,” but he replied to them, “If I tell you, you will not believe, 
    68: and if I question, you will not respond. 
    69: But from this time on the Son of Man will be seated at the right hand of the power of God.” 
    70: They all asked, “Are you then the Son of God?” He replied to them, “You say that I am.” 
    71: Then they said, “What further need have we for testimony? We have heard it from his own mouth.”


  Chapter 23.

    1: 
    2: 
    3: Jesus Before Pilate. 1 Then the whole assembly of them arose and brought him before Pilate. 2 They brought charges against him, saying, “We found this man misleading our people; he opposes the payment of taxes to Caesar and maintains that he is the Messiah, a king.” 3 Pilate asked him, “Are you the king of the Jews?” He said to him in reply, “You say so.” 
    4: Pilate then addressed the chief priests and the crowds, “I find this man not guilty.” 
    5: But they were adamant and said, “He is inciting the people with his teaching throughout all Judea, from Galilee where he began even to here.”
Jesus Before Herod. 
    6: On hearing this Pilate asked if the man was a Galilean; 
    7: and upon learning that he was under Herod’s jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod who was in Jerusalem at that time. 
    8: Herod was very glad to see Jesus; he had been wanting to see him for a long time, for he had heard about him and had been hoping to see him perform some sign. 
    9: e questioned him at length, but he gave him no answer. 
    10: The chief priests and scribes, meanwhile, stood by accusing him harshly. 
    11:  Herod and his soldiers treated him contemptuously and mocked him, and after clothing him in resplendent garb, he sent him back to Pilate. 
    12: Herod and Pilate became friends that very day, even though they had been enemies formerly. 
    13: Pilate then summoned the chief priests, the rulers, and the people 
    14: and said to them, “You brought this man to me and accused him of inciting the people to revolt. I have conducted my investigation in your presence and have not found this man guilty of the charges you have brought against him, 
    15: nor did Herod, for he sent him back to us. So no capital crime has been committed by him. 
    16: Therefore I shall have him flogged and then release him.” 
    17: ][c]
The Sentence of Death. 
    18: But all together they shouted out, “Away with this man! Release Barabbas to us.” 
    19: (Now Barabbas had been imprisoned for a rebellion that had taken place in the city and for murder.) 
    20: Again Pilate addressed them, still wishing to release Jesus, 
    21: but they continued their shouting, “Crucify him! Crucify him!” 
    22: 
    23: Jesus Before Pilate. 1 Then the whole assembly of them arose and brought him before Pilate. 2 They brought charges against him, saying, “We found this man misleading our people; he opposes the payment of taxes to Caesar and maintains that he is the Messiah, a king.” 3 Pilate asked him, “Are you the king of the Jews?” He said to him in reply, “You say so.” 4 Pilate then addressed the chief priests and the crowds, “I find this man not guilty.” 5 But they were adamant and said, “He is inciting the people with his teaching throughout all Judea, from Galilee where he began even to here.”
Jesus Before Herod. 6 [b]On hearing this Pilate asked if the man was a Galilean; 7 and upon learning that he was under Herod’s jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod who was in Jerusalem at that time. 8 Herod was very glad to see Jesus; he had been wanting to see him for a long time, for he had heard about him and had been hoping to see him perform some sign. 9 He questioned him at length, but he gave him no answer. 10 The chief priests and scribes, meanwhile, stood by accusing him harshly. 11 [Even] Herod and his soldiers treated him contemptuously and mocked him, and after clothing him in resplendent garb, he sent him back to Pilate. 12 Herod and Pilate became friends that very day, even though they had been enemies formerly. 13 Pilate then summoned the chief priests, the rulers, and the people 14 and said to them, “You brought this man to me and accused him of inciting the people to revolt. I have conducted my investigation in your presence and have not found this man guilty of the charges you have brought against him, 15 nor did Herod, for he sent him back to us. So no capital crime has been committed by him. 16 Therefore I shall have him flogged and then release him.” [17 ][c]
The Sentence of Death. 18 But all together they shouted out, “Away with this man! Release Barabbas to us.” 19 (Now Barabbas had been imprisoned for a rebellion that had taken place in the city and for murder.) 20 Again Pilate addressed them, still wishing to release Jesus, 21 but they continued their shouting, “Crucify him! Crucify him!” 22 Pilate addressed them a third time, “What evil has this man done? I found him guilty of no capital crime. Therefore I shall have him flogged and then release him.” 23 With loud shouts, however, they persisted in calling for his crucifixion, and their voices prevailed. 
    24: The verdict of Pilate was that their demand should be granted. 
    25: So he released the man who had been imprisoned for rebellion and murder, for whom they asked, and he handed Jesus over to them to deal with as they wished.
The Way of the Cross. 
    26: As they led him away they took hold of a certain Simon, a Cyrenian, who was coming in from the country; and after laying the cross on him, they made him carry it behind Jesus. 
    27: A large crowd of people followed Jesus, including many women who mourned and lamented him. 
    28: Jesus turned to them and said, “Daughters of Jerusalem, do not weep for me; weep instead for yourselves and for your children, 
    29: for indeed, the days are coming when people will say, ‘Blessed are the barren, the wombs that never bore and the breasts that never nursed.’ 
    30: At that time people will say to the mountains, ‘Fall upon us!’ and to the hills, ‘Cover us!’ 
    31: for if these things are done when the wood is green what will happen when it is dry?” 
    32: Now two others, both criminals, were led away with him to be executed.
The Crucifixion. 
    33: When they came to the place called the Skull, they crucified him and the criminals there, one on his right, the other on his left. 
    34: [e] They divided his garments by casting lots. 
    35: The people stood by and watched; the rulers, meanwhile, sneered at him and said, “He saved others, let him save himself if he is the chosen one, the Messiah of God.” 
    36: Even the soldiers jeered at him. As they approached to offer him wine 
    37: they called out, “If you are King of the Jews, save yourself.” 
    38: Above him there was an inscription that read, “This is the King of the Jews.”

    39: Now one of the criminals hanging there reviled Jesus, saying, “Are you not the Messiah? Save yourself and us.” 
    40: The other, however, rebuking him, said in reply, “Have you no fear of God, for you are subject to the same condemnation? 
    41: And indeed, we have been condemned justly, for the sentence we received corresponds to our crimes, but this man has done nothing criminal.” 
    42: Then he said, “Jesus, remember me when you come into your kingdom.” 
    43: He replied to him, “Amen, I say to you, today you will be with me in Paradise.”
The Death of Jesus. 
    44: It was now about noon and darkness came over the whole land until three in the afternoon 
    45: because of an eclipse of the sun. Then the veil of the temple was torn down the middle. 
    46: Jesus cried out in a loud voice, “Father, into your hands I commend my spirit”; and when he had said this he breathed his last. 
    47: The centurion who witnessed what had happened glorified God and said, “This man was innocent beyond doubt.” 
    48: When all the people who had gathered for this spectacle saw what had happened, they returned home beating their breasts; 
    49: but all his acquaintances stood at a distance, including the women who had followed him from Galilee and saw these events.
The Burial of Jesus. 
    50: Now there was a virtuous and righteous man named Joseph who, though he was a member of the council, 
    51: had not consented to their plan of action. He came from the Jewish town of Arimathea and was awaiting the kingdom of God. 
    52: He went to Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus. 
    53: After he had taken the body down, he wrapped it in a linen cloth and laid him in a rock-hewn tomb in which no one had yet been buried. 
    54: It was the day of preparation, and the sabbath was about to begin. 
    55: The women who had come from Galilee with him followed behind, and when they had seen the tomb and the way in which his body was laid in it, 
    56: they returned and prepared spices and perfumed oils. Then they rested on the sabbath according to the commandment.


  Chapter 24.

    1: 
    2: 
The Resurrection of Jesus. 1 But at daybreak on the first day of the week they took the spices they had prepared and went to the tomb. 2 They found the stone rolled away from the tomb; 
    3: 
    4: The Resurrection of Jesus. 1 But at daybreak on the first day of the week they took the spices they had prepared and went to the tomb. 2 They found the stone rolled away from the tomb; 3 but when they entered, they did not find the body of the Lord Jesus. 4 While they were puzzling over this, behold, two men in dazzling garments appeared to them. 
    5: They were terrified and bowed their faces to the ground. They said to them, “Why do you seek the living one among the dead? 
    6: He is not here, but he has been raised. Remember what he said to you while he was still in Galilee, 
    7: that the Son of Man must be handed over to sinners and be crucified, and rise on the third day.” 
    8: And they remembered his words. 
    9: c]Then they returned from the tomb and announced all these things to the eleven and to all the others. 
    10: The women were Mary Magdalene, Joanna, and Mary the mother of James; the others who accompanied them also told this to the apostles, 
    11: but their story seemed like nonsense and they did not believe them. 
    12: But Peter got up and ran to the tomb, bent down, and saw the burial cloths alone; then he went home amazed at what had happened.
The Appearance on the Road to Emmaus.[e] 
    13: Now that very day two of them were going to a village seven miles from Jerusalem called Emmaus, 
    14: and they were conversing about all the things that had occurred. 
    15: And it happened that while they were conversing and debating, Jesus himself drew near and walked with them, 
    16: but their eyes were prevented from recognizing him. 
    17: He asked them, “What are you discussing as you walk along?” They stopped, looking downcast. 
    18: One of them, named Cleopas, said to him in reply, “Are you the only visitor to Jerusalem who does not know of the things that have taken place there in these days?” 
    19: And he replied to them, “What sort of things?” They said to him, “The things that happened to Jesus the Nazarene, who was a prophet mighty in deed and word before God and all the people, 
    20: how our chief priests and rulers both handed him over to a sentence of death and crucified him. 
    21: But we were hoping that he would be the one to redeem Israel; and besides all this, it is now the third day since this took place. 
    22: Some women from our group, however, have astounded us: they were at the tomb early in the morning 
    23: 
    24: The Resurrection of Jesus. 1 But at daybreak on the first day of the week they took the spices they had prepared and went to the tomb. 2 They found the stone rolled away from the tomb; 3 but when they entered, they did not find the body of the Lord Jesus. 4 While they were puzzling over this, behold, two men in dazzling garments appeared to them. 5 They were terrified and bowed their faces to the ground. They said to them, “Why do you seek the living one among the dead? 6 He is not here, but he has been raised. Remember what he said to you while he was still in Galilee, 7 that the Son of Man must be handed over to sinners and be crucified, and rise on the third day.” 8 And they remembered his words. 9 [c]Then they returned from the tomb and announced all these things to the eleven and to all the others. 10 The women were Mary Magdalene, Joanna, and Mary the mother of James; the others who accompanied them also told this to the apostles, 11 but their story seemed like nonsense and they did not believe them. 12 [d]But Peter got up and ran to the tomb, bent down, and saw the burial cloths alone; then he went home amazed at what had happened.
The Appearance on the Road to Emmaus.[e] 13 Now that very day two of them were going to a village seven miles[f] from Jerusalem called Emmaus, 14 and they were conversing about all the things that had occurred. 15 And it happened that while they were conversing and debating, Jesus himself drew near and walked with them, 16 [g]but their eyes were prevented from recognizing him. 17 He asked them, “What are you discussing as you walk along?” They stopped, looking downcast. 18 One of them, named Cleopas, said to him in reply, “Are you the only visitor to Jerusalem who does not know of the things that have taken place there in these days?” 19 And he replied to them, “What sort of things?” They said to him, “The things that happened to Jesus the Nazarene, who was a prophet mighty in deed and word before God and all the people, 20 how our chief priests and rulers both handed him over to a sentence of death and crucified him. 21 But we were hoping that he would be the one to redeem Israel; and besides all this, it is now the third day since this took place. 22 Some women from our group, however, have astounded us: they were at the tomb early in the morning 23 and did not find his body; they came back and reported that they had indeed seen a vision of angels who announced that he was alive. 24 Then some of those with us went to the tomb and found things just as the women had described, but him they did not see.” 
    25: And he said to them, “Oh, how foolish you are! How slow of heart to believe all that the prophets spoke! 
    26: Was it not necessary that the Messiah should suffer these things and enter into his glory?” 
    27: Then beginning with Moses and all the prophets, he interpreted to them what referred to him in all the scriptures. 
    28: As they approached the village to which they were going, he gave the impression that he was going on farther. 
    29: But they urged him, “Stay with us, for it is nearly evening and the day is almost over.” So he went in to stay with them. 
    30: And it happened that, while he was with them at table, he took bread, said the blessing, broke it, and gave it to them. 
    31: With that their eyes were opened and they recognized him, but he vanished from their sight. 
    32: Then they said to each other, “Were not our hearts burning  while he spoke to us on the way and opened the scriptures to us?” 
    33: So they set out at once and returned to Jerusalem where they found gathered together the eleven and those with them 
    34: who were saying, “The Lord has truly been raised and has appeared to Simon!” 
    35: Then the two recounted what had taken place on the way and how he was made known to them in the breaking of the bread.
The Appearance to the Disciples in Jerusalem. 
    36: While they were still speaking about this, he stood in their midst and said to them, “Peace be with you.” 
    37: But they were startled and terrified and thought that they were seeing a ghost. 
    38: Then he said to them, “Why are you troubled? And why do questions arise in your hearts? 
    39: Look at my hands and my feet, that it is I myself. Touch me and see, because a ghost does not have flesh and bones as you can see I have.” 
    40: And as he said this, he showed them his hands and his feet. 
    41: While they were still incredulous for joy and were amazed, he asked them, “Have you anything here to eat?” 
    42: They gave him a piece of baked fish; 
    43: he took it and ate it in front of them.

    44: He said to them, “These are my words that I spoke to you while I was still with you, that everything written about me in the law of Moses and in the prophets and psalms must be fulfilled.” 
    45: Then he opened their minds to understand the scriptures. 
    46: And he said to them, “Thus it is written that the Messiah would suffer and rise from the dead on the third day 
    47: and that repentance, for the forgiveness of sins, would be preached in his name to all the nations, beginning from Jerusalem. 
    48: You are witnesses of these things. 
    49: And  I am sending the promise of my Father[l] upon you; but stay in the city until you are clothed with power from on high.”
The Ascension.[m] 
    50: Then he led them  as far as Bethany, raised his hands, and blessed them. 
    51: As he blessed them he parted from them and was taken up to heaven. 
    52: They did him homage and then returned to Jerusalem with great joy, 
    53: and they were continually in the temple praising God.


End of day 299.