Day 295:

Reading Luke, chapters ['5', '6', '7', '8']:

  Chapter 5.

    1: While the crowd was pressing in on Jesus and listening to the word of God, he was standing by the Lake of Gennesaret. 
    2: He saw two boats there alongside the lake; the fishermen had disembarked and were washing their nets. 
    3: Getting into one of the boats, the one belonging to Simon, he asked him to put out a short distance from the shore. Then he sat down and taught the crowds from the boat. 
    4: 
    5: The Call of Simon the Fisherman. 1 While the crowd was pressing in on Jesus and listening to the word of God, he was standing by the Lake of Gennesaret. 2 He saw two boats there alongside the lake; the fishermen had disembarked and were washing their nets. 3 Getting into one of the boats, the one belonging to Simon, he asked him to put out a short distance from the shore. Then he sat down and taught the crowds from the boat. 4 After he had finished speaking, he said to Simon, “Put out into deep water and lower your nets for a catch.” 5 Simon said in reply, “Master, we have worked hard all night and have caught nothing, but at your command I will lower the nets.” 
    6: When they had done this, they caught a great number of fish and their nets were tearing. 
    7: They signaled to their partners in the other boat to come to help them. They came and filled both boats so that they were in danger of sinking. 
    8: When Simon Peter saw this, he fell at the knees of Jesus and said, “Depart from me, Lord, for I am a sinful man.” 
    9: or astonishment at the catch of fish they had made seized him and all those with him, 
    10: and likewise James and John, the sons of Zebedee, who were partners of Simon. Jesus said to Simon, “Do not be afraid; from now on you will be catching men.” 
    11: When they brought their boats to the shore, they left everything and followed him.
The Cleansing of a Leper. 
    12: Now there was a man full of leprosy in one of the towns where he was; and when he saw Jesus, he fell prostrate, pleaded with him, and said, “Lord, if you wish, you can make me clean.” 
    13: Jesus stretched out his hand, touched him, and said, “I do will it. Be made clean.” And the leprosy left him immediately. 
    14: Then he ordered him not to tell anyone, but “Go, show yourself to the priest and offer for your cleansing what Moses prescribed; that will be proof for them.” 
    15: The report about him spread all the more, and great crowds assembled to listen to him and to be cured of their ailments, 
    16: but he would withdraw to deserted places to pray.
The Healing of a Paralytic. 
    17: One day as Jesus was teaching, Pharisees[f] and teachers of the law were sitting there who had come from every village of Galilee and Judea and Jerusalem, and the power of the Lord was with him for healing. 
    18: And some men brought on a stretcher a man who was paralyzed; they were trying to bring him in and set  in his presence. 
    19: But not finding a way to bring him in because of the crowd, they went up on the roof and lowered him on the stretcher through the tiles into the middle in front of Jesus. 
    20: When he saw their faith, he said, “As for you, your sins are forgiven.” 
    21: Then the scribes and Pharisees began to ask themselves, “Who is this who speaks blasphemies? Who but God alone can forgive sins?” 
    22: Jesus knew their thoughts and said to them in reply, “What are you thinking in your hearts? 
    23: Which is easier, to say, ‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Rise and walk’? 
    24: But that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins”—he said to the man who was paralyzed, “I say to you, rise, pick up your stretcher, and go home.” 
    25: He stood up immediately before them, picked up what he had been lying on, and went home, glorifying God. 
    26: Then astonishment seized them all and they glorified God, and, struck with awe, they said, “We have seen incredible things today.”
The Call of Levi. 
    27: After this he went out and saw a tax collector named Levi sitting at the customs post. He said to him, “Follow me.” 
    28: And leaving everything behind, he got up and followed him. 
    29: Then Levi gave a great banquet for him in his house, and a large crowd of tax collectors and others were at table with them. 
    30: The Pharisees and their scribes complained to his disciples, saying, “Why do you eat and drink with tax collectors and sinners?” 
    31: Jesus said to them in reply, “Those who are healthy do not need a physician, but the sick do. 
    32: I have not come to call the righteous to repentance but sinners.”
The Question About Fasting. 
    33: And they said to him, “The disciples of John fast often and offer prayers, and the disciples of the Pharisees do the same; but yours eat and drink.” 
    34: Jesus answered them, “Can you make the wedding guests[m] fast while the bridegroom is with them? 
    35: But the days will come, and when the bridegroom is taken away from them, then they will fast in those days.” 
    36: And he also told them a parable. “No one tears a piece from a new cloak to patch an old one. Otherwise, he will tear the new and the piece from it will not match the old cloak. 
    37: Likewise, no one pours new wine into old wineskins. Otherwise, the new wine will burst the skins, and it will be spilled, and the skins will be ruined. 
    38: Rather, new wine must be poured into fresh wineskins. 
    39:  no one who has been drinking old wine desires new, for he says, ‘The old is good.’”[o]


  Chapter 6.

    1: While he was going through a field of grain on a sabbath, his disciples were picking the heads of grain, rubbing them in their hands, and eating them. 
    2: Some Pharisees said, “Why are you doing what is unlawful on the sabbath?” 
    3: Jesus said to them in reply, “Have you not read what David did when he and those  with him were hungry? 
    4:  he went into the house of God, took the bread of offering,[b] which only the priests could lawfully eat, ate of it, and shared it with his companions.” 
    5: 
    6: Debates About the Sabbath. 1 While he was going through a field of grain on a sabbath, his disciples were picking the heads of grain, rubbing them in their hands, and eating them. 2 Some Pharisees said, “Why are you doing what is unlawful on the sabbath?” 3 Jesus said to them in reply, “Have you not read what David did when he and those [who were] with him were hungry? 4 [How] he went into the house of God, took the bread of offering,[b] which only the priests could lawfully eat, ate of it, and shared it with his companions.” 5 Then he said to them, “The Son of Man is lord of the sabbath.”
6 On another sabbath he went into the synagogue and taught, and there was a man there whose right hand was withered. 
    7: The scribes and the Pharisees watched him closely to see if he would cure on the sabbath so that they might discover a reason to accuse him. 
    8: But he realized their intentions and said to the man with the withered hand, “Come up and stand before us.” And he rose and stood there. 
    9: hen Jesus said to them, “I ask you, is it lawful to do good on the sabbath rather than to do evil, to save life rather than to destroy it?” 
    10: Looking around at them all, he then said to him, “Stretch out your hand.” He did so and his hand was restored. 
    11: But they became enraged and discussed together what they might do to Jesus.
The Mission of the Twelve. 
    12: In those days he departed to the mountain to pray, and he spent the night in prayer to God. 
    13: When day came, he called his disciples to himself, and from them he chose Twelve, whom he also named apostles: 
    14: Simon, whom he named Peter, and his brother Andrew, James, John, Philip, Bartholomew, 
    15: Matthew, Thomas, James the son of Alphaeus, Simon who was called a Zealot, 
    16: and Judas the son of James, and Judas Iscariot, who became a traitor.
Ministering to a Great Multitude. 
    17: And he came down with them and stood on a stretch of level ground. A great crowd of his disciples and a large number of the people from all Judea and Jerusalem and the coastal region of Tyre and Sidon 
    18: came to hear him and to be healed of their diseases; and even those who were tormented by unclean spirits were cured. 
    19: Everyone in the crowd sought to touch him because power came forth from him and healed them all.
Sermon on the Plain. 
    20: And raising his eyes toward his disciples he said:
“Blessed are you who are poor,[k]
    for the kingdom of God is yours.

    21: 
Blessed are you who are now hungry,
    for you will be satisfied.
Blessed are you who are now weeping,
    for you will laugh.

    22: 
Blessed are you when people hate you,
    and when they exclude and insult you,
    and denounce your name as evil
    on account of the Son of Man.

    23: Rejoice and leap for joy on that day! Behold, your reward will be great in heaven. For their ancestors treated the prophets in the same way.

    24: 
But woe to you who are rich,
    for you have received your consolation.

    25: 
But woe to you who are filled now,
    for you will be hungry.
Woe to you who laugh now,
    for you will grieve and weep.

    26: 
Woe to you when all speak well of you,
    for their ancestors treated the false prophets in this way.
Love of Enemies. 
    27: “But to you who hear I say, love your enemies, do good to those who hate you, 
    28: bless those who curse you, pray for those who mistreat you. 
    29: To the person who strikes you on one cheek, offer the other one as well, and from the person who takes your cloak, do not withhold even your tunic. 
    30: Give to everyone who asks of you, and from the one who takes what is yours do not demand it back. 
    31: Do to others as you would have them do to you. 
    32: For if you love those who love you, what credit is that to you? Even sinners love those who love them. 
    33: And if you do good to those who do good to you, what credit is that to you? Even sinners do the same. 
    34: If you lend money to those from whom you expect repayment, what credit  that to you? Even sinners lend to sinners, and get back the same amount. 
    35: But rather, love your enemies and do good to them, and lend expecting nothing back; then your reward will be great and you will be children of the Most High, for he himself is kind to the ungrateful and the wicked. 
    36: Be merciful, just as  your Father is merciful.
Judging Others.[m] 
    37: “Stop judging and you will not be judged. Stop condemning and you will not be condemned. Forgive and you will be forgiven. 
    38: Give and gifts will be given to you; a good measure, packed together, shaken down, and overflowing, will be poured into your lap. For the measure with which you measure will in return be measured out to you.” 
    39: And he told them a parable, “Can a blind person guide a blind person? Will not both fall into a pit? 
    40: No disciple is superior to the teacher; but when fully trained, every disciple will be like his teacher. 
    41: Why do you notice the splinter in your brother’s eye, but do not perceive the wooden beam in your own? 
    42: How can you say to your brother, ‘Brother, let me remove that splinter in your eye,’ when you do not even notice the wooden beam in your own eye? You hypocrite! Remove the wooden beam from your eye first; then you will see clearly to remove the splinter in your brother’s eye.
A Tree Known by Its Fruit. 
    43: “A good tree does not bear rotten fruit, nor does a rotten tree bear good fruit. 
    44: For every tree is known by its own fruit. For people do not pick figs from thornbushes, nor do they gather grapes from brambles. 
    45: A good person out of the store of goodness in his heart produces good, but an evil person out of a store of evil produces evil; for from the fullness of the heart the mouth speaks.
The Two Foundations. 
    46: “Why do you call me, ‘Lord, Lord,’ but not do what I command? 
    47: I will show you what someone is like who comes to me, listens to my words, and acts on them. 
    48: That one is like a person building a house, who dug deeply and laid the foundation on rock; when the flood came, the river burst against that house but could not shake it because it had been well built. 
    49: But the one who listens and does not act is like a person who built a house on the ground without a foundation. When the river burst against it, it collapsed at once and was completely destroyed.”


  Chapter 7.

    1: When he had finished all his words to the people, he entered Capernaum.[b] 
    2: A centurion there had a slave who was ill and about to die, and he was valuable to him. 
    3: When he heard about Jesus, he sent elders of the Jews to him, asking him to come and save the life of his slave. 
    4: They approached Jesus and strongly urged him to come, saying, “He deserves to have you do this for him, 
    5: for he loves our nation and he built the synagogue for us.” 
    6: 
    7: The Healing of a Centurion’s Slave. 1 When he had finished all his words to the people, he entered Capernaum.[b] 2 A centurion[c] there had a slave who was ill and about to die, and he was valuable to him. 3 When he heard about Jesus, he sent elders of the Jews to him, asking him to come and save the life of his slave. 4 They approached Jesus and strongly urged him to come, saying, “He deserves to have you do this for him, 5 for he loves our nation and he built the synagogue for us.” 6 And Jesus went with them, but when he was only a short distance from the house, the centurion sent friends to tell him, “Lord, do not trouble yourself, for I am not worthy to have you enter under my roof.[d] 7 Therefore, I did not consider myself worthy to come to you; but say the word and let my servant be healed. 
    8: For I too am a person subject to authority, with soldiers subject to me. And I say to one, ‘Go,’ and he goes; and to another, ‘Come here,’ and he comes; and to my slave, ‘Do this,’ and he does it.” 
    9: hen Jesus heard this he was amazed at him and, turning, said to the crowd following him, “I tell you, not even in Israel have I found such faith.” 
    10: When the messengers returned to the house, they found the slave in good health.
Raising of the Widow’s Son. 
    11: Soon afterward he journeyed to a city called Nain, and his disciples and a large crowd accompanied him. 
    12: As he drew near to the gate of the city, a man who had died was being carried out, the only son of his mother, and she was a widow. A large crowd from the city was with her. 
    13: When the Lord saw her, he was moved with pity for her and said to her, “Do not weep.” 
    14: He stepped forward and touched the coffin; at this the bearers halted, and he said, “Young man, I tell you, arise!” 
    15: The dead man sat up and began to speak, and Jesus gave him to his mother. 
    16: Fear seized them all, and they glorified God, exclaiming, “A great prophet has arisen in our midst,” and “God has visited his people.” 
    17: This report about him spread through the whole of Judea and in all the surrounding region.
The Messengers from John the Baptist. 
    18: The disciples of John told him about all these things. John summoned two of his disciples 
    19: and sent them to the Lord to ask, “Are you the one who is to come, or should we look for another?” 
    20: When the men came to him, they said, “John the Baptist has sent us to you to ask, ‘Are you the one who is to come, or should we look for another?’” 
    21: At that time he cured many of their diseases, sufferings, and evil spirits; he also granted sight to many who were blind. 
    22: And he said to them in reply, “Go and tell John what you have seen and heard: the blind regain their sight, the lame walk, lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, the poor have the good news proclaimed to them. 
    23: And blessed is the one who takes no offense at me.”
Jesus’ Testimony to John. 
    24: When the messengers of John had left, Jesus began to speak to the crowds about John. “What did you go out to the desert to see—a reed swayed by the wind? 
    25: Then what did you go out to see? Someone dressed in fine garments? Those who dress luxuriously and live sumptuously are found in royal palaces. 
    26: Then what did you go out to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you, and more than a prophet. 
    27: This is the one about whom scripture says:
‘Behold, I am sending my messenger ahead of you,
    he will prepare your way before you.’

    28: I tell you, among those born of women, no one is greater than John; yet the least in the kingdom of God is greater than he.” 
    29: (All the people who listened, including the tax collectors, and who were baptized with the baptism of John, acknowledged the righteousness of God; 
    30: but the Pharisees and scholars of the law, who were not baptized by him, rejected the plan of God for themselves.)

    31: “Then to what shall I compare the people of this generation? What are they like? 
    32: They are like children who sit in the marketplace and call to one another,
‘We played the flute for you, but you did not dance.
    We sang a dirge, but you did not weep.’

    33: For John the Baptist came neither eating food nor drinking wine, and you said, ‘He is possessed by a demon.’ 
    34: The Son of Man came eating and drinking and you said, ‘Look, he is a glutton and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and sinners.’ 
    35: But wisdom is vindicated by all her children.”
The Pardon of the Sinful Woman. 
    36: A Pharisee invited him to dine with him, and he entered the Pharisee’s house and reclined at table. 
    37: Now there was a sinful woman in the city who learned that he was at table in the house of the Pharisee. Bringing an alabaster flask of ointment, 
    38: she stood behind him at his feet weeping and began to bathe his feet with her tears. Then she wiped them with her hair, kissed them, and anointed them with the ointment. 
    39: When the Pharisee who had invited him saw this he said to himself, “If this man were a prophet, he would know who and what sort of woman this is who is touching him, that she is a sinner.” 
    40: Jesus said to him in reply, “Simon, I have something to say to you.” “Tell me, teacher,” he said. 
    41: “Two people were in debt to a certain creditor; one owed five hundred days’ wages and the other owed fifty. 
    42: Since they were unable to repay the debt, he forgave it for both. Which of them will love him more?” 
    43: Simon said in reply, “The one, I suppose, whose larger debt was forgiven.” He said to him, “You have judged rightly.” 
    44: Then he turned to the woman and said to Simon, “Do you see this woman? When I entered your house, you did not give me water for my feet, but she has bathed them with her tears and wiped them with her hair. 
    45: You did not give me a kiss, but she has not ceased kissing my feet since the time I entered. 
    46: You did not anoint my head with oil, but she anointed my feet with ointment. 
    47: So I tell you, her many sins have been forgiven; hence, she has shown great love. But the one to whom little is forgiven, loves little.” 
    48: He said to her, “Your sins are forgiven.” 
    49: The others at table said to themselves, “Who is this who even forgives sins?” 
    50: But he said to the woman, “Your faith has saved you; go in peace.”


  Chapter 8.

    1: Afterward he journeyed from one town and village to another, preaching and proclaiming the good news of the kingdom of God. Accompanying him were the Twelve 
    2: and some women who had been cured of evil spirits and infirmities, Mary, called Magdalene, from whom seven demons had gone out, 
    3: Joanna, the wife of Herod’s steward Chuza, Susanna, and many others who provided for them out of their resources.
The Parable of the Sower. 
    4: When a large crowd gathered, with people from one town after another journeying to him, he spoke in a parable.[c] 
    5: “A sower went out to sow his seed. And as he sowed, some seed fell on the path and was trampled, and the birds of the sky ate it up. 
    6: Some seed fell on rocky ground, and when it grew, it withered for lack of moisture. 
    7: 
    8: Galilean Women Follow Jesus. 1 Afterward he journeyed from one town and village to another, preaching and proclaiming the good news of the kingdom of God. Accompanying him were the Twelve 2 and some women who had been cured of evil spirits and infirmities, Mary, called Magdalene, from whom seven demons had gone out, 3 Joanna, the wife of Herod’s steward Chuza, Susanna, and many others who provided for them out of their resources.
The Parable of the Sower. 4 [b]When a large crowd gathered, with people from one town after another journeying to him, he spoke in a parable.[c] 5 “A sower went out to sow his seed. And as he sowed, some seed fell on the path and was trampled, and the birds of the sky ate it up. 6 Some seed fell on rocky ground, and when it grew, it withered for lack of moisture. 7 Some seed fell among thorns, and the thorns grew with it and choked it. 8 And some seed fell on good soil, and when it grew, it produced fruit a hundredfold.” After saying this, he called out, “Whoever has ears to hear ought to hear.”
The Purpose of the Parables. 
    9: hen his disciples asked him what the meaning of this parable might be. 
    10: He answered, “Knowledge of the mysteries of the kingdom of God has been granted to you; but to the rest, they are made known through parables so that ‘they may look but not see, and hear but not understand.’
The Parable of the Sower Explained. 
    11: “This is the meaning of the parable. The seed is the word of God. 
    12: Those on the path are the ones who have heard, but the devil comes and takes away the word from their hearts that they may not believe and be saved. 
    13: Those on rocky ground are the ones who, when they hear, receive the word with joy, but they have no root; they believe only for a time and fall away in time of trial. 
    14: As for the seed that fell among thorns, they are the ones who have heard, but as they go along, they are choked by the anxieties and riches and pleasures of life, and they fail to produce mature fruit. 
    15: But as for the seed that fell on rich soil, they are the ones who, when they have heard the word, embrace it with a generous and good heart, and bear fruit through perseverance.
The Parable of the Lamp. 
    16: “No one who lights a lamp conceals it with a vessel or sets it under a bed; rather, he places it on a lampstand so that those who enter may see the light. 
    17: For there is nothing hidden that will not become visible, and nothing secret that will not be known and come to light. 
    18: Take care, then, how you hear. To anyone who has, more will be given, and from the one who has not, even what he seems to have will be taken away.”
Jesus and His Family. 
    19: Then his mother and his brothers came to him but were unable to join him because of the crowd. 
    20: He was told, “Your mother and your brothers are standing outside and they wish to see you.” 
    21: He said to them in reply, “My mother and my brothers are those who hear the word of God and act on it.”
The Calming of a Storm at Sea. 
    22: One day he got into a boat with his disciples and said to them, “Let us cross to the other side of the lake.” So they set sail, 
    23: and while they were sailing he fell asleep. A squall blew over the lake, and they were taking in water and were in danger. 
    24: They came and woke him saying, “Master, master, we are perishing!” He awakened, rebuked the wind and the waves, and they subsided and there was a calm. 
    25: Then he asked them, “Where is your faith?” But they were filled with awe and amazed and said to one another, “Who then is this, who commands even the winds and the sea, and they obey him?”
The Healing of the Gerasene Demoniac. 
    26: Then they sailed to the territory of the Gerasenes, which is opposite Galilee. 
    27: When he came ashore a man from the town who was possessed by demons met him. For a long time he had not worn clothes; he did not live in a house, but lived among the tombs. 
    28: When he saw Jesus, he cried out and fell down before him; in a loud voice he shouted, “What have you to do with me, Jesus, son of the Most High God? I beg you, do not torment me!” 
    29: For he had ordered the unclean spirit to come out of the man. (It had taken hold of him many times, and he used to be bound with chains and shackles as a restraint, but he would break his bonds and be driven by the demon into deserted places.) 
    30: Then Jesus asked him, “What is your name?” He replied, “Legion,” because many demons had entered him. 
    31: And they pleaded with him not to order them to depart to the abyss.

    32: A herd of many swine was feeding there on the hillside, and they pleaded with him to allow them to enter those swine; and he let them. 
    33: The demons came out of the man and entered the swine, and the herd rushed down the steep bank into the lake and was drowned. 
    34: When the swineherds saw what had happened, they ran away and reported the incident in the town and throughout the countryside. 
    35: People came out to see what had happened and, when they approached Jesus, they discovered the man from whom the demons had come out sitting at his feet. He was clothed and in his right mind, and they were seized with fear. 
    36: Those who witnessed it told them how the possessed man had been saved. 
    37: The entire population of the region of the Gerasenes asked Jesus to leave them because they were seized with great fear. So he got into a boat and returned. 
    38: The man from whom the demons had come out begged to remain with him, but he sent him away, saying, 
    39: “Return home and recount what God has done for you.” The man went off and proclaimed throughout the whole town what Jesus had done for him.
Jairus’s Daughter and the Woman with a Hemorrhage. 
    40: When Jesus returned, the crowd welcomed him, for they were all waiting for him. 
    41: And a man named Jairus, an official of the synagogue, came forward. He fell at the feet of Jesus and begged him to come to his house, 
    42: because he had an only daughter, about twelve years old, and she was dying. As he went, the crowds almost crushed him. 
    43: And a woman afflicted with hemorrhages for twelve years, who [had spent her whole livelihood on doctors and] was unable to be cured by anyone, 
    44: came up behind him and touched the tassel on his cloak. Immediately her bleeding stopped. 
    45: Jesus then asked, “Who touched me?” While all were denying it, Peter said, “Master, the crowds are pushing and pressing in upon you.” 
    46: But Jesus said, “Someone has touched me; for I know that power has gone out from me.” 
    47: When the woman realized that she had not escaped notice, she came forward trembling. Falling down before him, she explained in the presence of all the people why she had touched him and how she had been healed immediately. 
    48: He said to her, “Daughter, your faith has saved you; go in peace.”

    49: While he was still speaking, someone from the synagogue official’s house arrived and said, “Your daughter is dead; do not trouble the teacher any longer.” 
    50: On hearing this, Jesus answered him, “Do not be afraid; just have faith and she will be saved.” 
    51: When he arrived at the house he allowed no one to enter with him except Peter and John and James, and the child’s father and mother. 
    52: All were weeping and mourning for her, when he said, “Do not weep any longer, for she is not dead, but sleeping.” 
    53: And they ridiculed him, because they knew that she was dead. 
    54: But he took her by the hand and called to her, “Child, arise!” 
    55: Her breath returned and she immediately arose. He then directed that she should be given something to eat. 
    56: Her parents were astounded, and he instructed them to tell no one what had happened.


End of day 295.