Day 298:

Reading Luke, chapters ['17', '18', '19', '20']:

  Chapter 17.

    1: 
Temptations to Sin. 1 He said to his disciples, “Things that cause sin will inevitably occur, but woe to the person through whom they occur. 
    2: It would be better for him if a millstone were put around his neck and he be thrown into the sea than for him to cause one of these little ones to sin. 
    3: Be on your guard! If your brother sins, rebuke him; and if he repents, forgive him. 
    4: And if he wrongs you seven times in one day and returns to you seven times saying, ‘I am sorry,’ you should forgive him.”
Saying of Faith. 
    5: And the apostles said to the Lord, “Increase our faith.” 
    6: 
    7: Temptations to Sin. 1 He said to his disciples, “Things that cause sin will inevitably occur, but woe to the person through whom they occur. 2 It would be better for him if a millstone were put around his neck and he be thrown into the sea than for him to cause one of these little ones to sin. 3 Be on your guard! If your brother sins, rebuke him; and if he repents, forgive him. 4 And if he wrongs you seven times in one day and returns to you seven times saying, ‘I am sorry,’ you should forgive him.”
Saying of Faith. 5 And the apostles said to the Lord, “Increase our faith.” 6 The Lord replied, “If you have faith the size of a mustard seed, you would say to [this] mulberry tree, ‘Be uprooted and planted in the sea,’ and it would obey you.
Attitude of a Servant.[b] 7 “Who among you would say to your servant who has just come in from plowing or tending sheep in the field, ‘Come here immediately and take your place at table’? 
    8: Would he not rather say to him, ‘Prepare something for me to eat. Put on your apron and wait on me while I eat and drink. You may eat and drink when I am finished’? 
    9: s he grateful to that servant because he did what was commanded? 
    10: So should it be with you. When you have done all you have been commanded, say, ‘We are unprofitable servants; we have done what we were obliged to do.’”
The Cleansing of Ten Lepers. 
    11: As he continued his journey to Jerusalem, he traveled through Samaria and Galilee. 
    12: As he was entering a village, ten lepers met . They stood at a distance from him 
    13: and raised their voice, saying, “Jesus, Master! Have pity on us!” 
    14: And when he saw them, he said, “Go show yourselves to the priests.” As they were going they were cleansed. 
    15: And one of them, realizing he had been healed, returned, glorifying God in a loud voice; 
    16: 
    17: Temptations to Sin. 1 He said to his disciples, “Things that cause sin will inevitably occur, but woe to the person through whom they occur. 2 It would be better for him if a millstone were put around his neck and he be thrown into the sea than for him to cause one of these little ones to sin. 3 Be on your guard! If your brother sins, rebuke him; and if he repents, forgive him. 4 And if he wrongs you seven times in one day and returns to you seven times saying, ‘I am sorry,’ you should forgive him.”
Saying of Faith. 5 And the apostles said to the Lord, “Increase our faith.” 6 The Lord replied, “If you have faith the size of a mustard seed, you would say to [this] mulberry tree, ‘Be uprooted and planted in the sea,’ and it would obey you.
Attitude of a Servant.[b] 7 “Who among you would say to your servant who has just come in from plowing or tending sheep in the field, ‘Come here immediately and take your place at table’? 8 Would he not rather say to him, ‘Prepare something for me to eat. Put on your apron and wait on me while I eat and drink. You may eat and drink when I am finished’? 9 Is he grateful to that servant because he did what was commanded? 10 So should it be with you. When you have done all you have been commanded, say, ‘We are unprofitable servants; we have done what we were obliged to do.’”
The Cleansing of Ten Lepers.[c] 11 As he continued his journey to Jerusalem, he traveled through Samaria and Galilee.[d] 12 As he was entering a village, ten lepers met [him]. They stood at a distance from him 13 and raised their voice, saying, “Jesus, Master! Have pity on us!” 14 And when he saw them, he said, “Go show yourselves to the priests.”[e] As they were going they were cleansed. 15 And one of them, realizing he had been healed, returned, glorifying God in a loud voice; 16 and he fell at the feet of Jesus and thanked him. He was a Samaritan. 17 Jesus said in reply, “Ten were cleansed, were they not? Where are the other nine? 
    18: Has none but this foreigner returned to give thanks to God?” 
    19: Then he said to him, “Stand up and go; your faith has saved you.”
The Coming of the Kingdom of God. 
    20: Asked by the Pharisees when the kingdom of God would come, he said in reply, “The coming of the kingdom of God cannot be observed, 
    21: and no one will announce, ‘Look, here it is,’ or, ‘There it is.’ For behold, the kingdom of God is among you.”
The Day of the Son of Man. 
    22: Then he said to his disciples, “The days will come when you will long to see one of the days of the Son of Man, but you will not see it. 
    23: There will be those who will say to you, ‘Look, there he is,’  ‘Look, here he is.’ Do not go off, do not run in pursuit. 
    24: For just as lightning flashes and lights up the sky from one side to the other, so will the Son of Man be . 
    25: But first he must suffer greatly and be rejected by this generation. 
    26: As it was in the days of Noah, so it will be in the days of the Son of Man; 
    27: they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage up to the day that Noah entered the ark, and the flood came and destroyed them all. 
    28: Similarly, as it was in the days of Lot: they were eating, drinking, buying, selling, planting, building; 
    29: on the day when Lot left Sodom, fire and brimstone rained from the sky to destroy them all. 
    30: So it will be on the day the Son of Man is revealed. 
    31: On that day, a person who is on the housetop and whose belongings are in the house must not go down to get them, and likewise a person in the field must not return to what was left behind. 
    32: Remember the wife of Lot. 
    33: Whoever seeks to preserve his life will lose it, but whoever loses it will save it. 
    34: I tell you, on that night there will be two people in one bed; one will be taken, the other left. 
    35: And there will be two women grinding meal together; one will be taken, the other left.” 
    36: ][h] 
    37: They said to him in reply, “Where, Lord?” He said to them, “Where the body is, there also the vultures will gather.”


  Chapter 18.

    1: 
The Parable of the Persistent Widow. 1 Then he told them a parable about the necessity for them to pray always without becoming weary. He said, 
    2: “There was a judge in a certain town who neither feared God nor respected any human being. 
    3: And a widow in that town used to come to him and say, ‘Render a just decision for me against my adversary.’ 
    4: For a long time the judge was unwilling, but eventually he thought, ‘While it is true that I neither fear God nor respect any human being, 
    5: because this widow keeps bothering me I shall deliver a just decision for her lest she finally come and strike me.’” 
    6: The Lord said, “Pay attention to what the dishonest judge says. 
    7: 
    8: The Parable of the Persistent Widow. 1 Then he told them a parable about the necessity for them to pray always without becoming weary. He said, 2 “There was a judge in a certain town who neither feared God nor respected any human being. 3 And a widow in that town used to come to him and say, ‘Render a just decision for me against my adversary.’ 4 For a long time the judge was unwilling, but eventually he thought, ‘While it is true that I neither fear God nor respect any human being, 5 [b]because this widow keeps bothering me I shall deliver a just decision for her lest she finally come and strike me.’” 6 The Lord said, “Pay attention to what the dishonest judge says. 7 Will not God then secure the rights of his chosen ones who call out to him day and night? Will he be slow to answer them? 8 I tell you, he will see to it that justice is done for them speedily. But when the Son of Man comes, will he find faith on earth?”
The Parable of the Pharisee and the Tax Collector. 
    9: e then addressed this parable to those who were convinced of their own righteousness and despised everyone else. 
    10: “Two people went up to the temple area to pray; one was a Pharisee and the other was a tax collector. 
    11: The Pharisee took up his position and spoke this prayer to himself, ‘O God, I thank you that I am not like the rest of humanity—greedy, dishonest, adulterous—or even like this tax collector. 
    12: I fast twice a week, and I pay tithes on my whole income.’ 
    13: But the tax collector stood off at a distance and would not even raise his eyes to heaven but beat his breast and prayed, ‘O God, be merciful to me a sinner.’ 
    14: I tell you, the latter went home justified, not the former; for everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, and the one who humbles himself will be exalted.”
Saying on Children and the Kingdom. 
    15: People were bringing even infants to him that he might touch them,[d] and when the disciples saw this, they rebuked them. 
    16: Jesus, however, called the children to himself and said, “Let the children come to me and do not prevent them; for the kingdom of God belongs to such as these. 
    17: 
    18: The Parable of the Persistent Widow. 1 Then he told them a parable about the necessity for them to pray always without becoming weary. He said, 2 “There was a judge in a certain town who neither feared God nor respected any human being. 3 And a widow in that town used to come to him and say, ‘Render a just decision for me against my adversary.’ 4 For a long time the judge was unwilling, but eventually he thought, ‘While it is true that I neither fear God nor respect any human being, 5 [b]because this widow keeps bothering me I shall deliver a just decision for her lest she finally come and strike me.’” 6 The Lord said, “Pay attention to what the dishonest judge says. 7 Will not God then secure the rights of his chosen ones who call out to him day and night? Will he be slow to answer them? 8 I tell you, he will see to it that justice is done for them speedily. But when the Son of Man comes, will he find faith on earth?”
The Parable of the Pharisee and the Tax Collector. 9 He then addressed this parable to those who were convinced of their own righteousness and despised everyone else. 10 “Two people went up to the temple area to pray; one was a Pharisee and the other was a tax collector. 11 The Pharisee took up his position and spoke this prayer to himself, ‘O God, I thank you that I am not like the rest of humanity—greedy, dishonest, adulterous—or even like this tax collector. 12 I fast twice a week, and I pay tithes on my whole income.’ 13 But the tax collector stood off at a distance and would not even raise his eyes to heaven but beat his breast and prayed, ‘O God, be merciful to me a sinner.’ 14 I tell you, the latter went home justified, not the former; for everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, and the one who humbles himself will be exalted.”
Saying on Children and the Kingdom. 15 [c]People were bringing even infants to him that he might touch them,[d] and when the disciples saw this, they rebuked them. 16 Jesus, however, called the children to himself and said, “Let the children come to me and do not prevent them; for the kingdom of God belongs to such as these. 17 Amen, I say to you, whoever does not accept the kingdom of God like a child will not enter it.”
The Rich Official. 18 An official asked him this question, “Good teacher, what must I do to inherit eternal life?” 
    19: Jesus answered him, “Why do you call me good? No one is good but God alone. 
    20: You know the commandments, ‘You shall not commit adultery; you shall not kill; you shall not steal; you shall not bear false witness; honor your father and your mother.’” 
    21: And he replied, “All of these I have observed from my youth.” 
    22: When Jesus heard this he said to him, “There is still one thing left for you: sell all that you have and distribute it to the poor, and you will have a treasure in heaven. Then come, follow me.” 
    23: But when he heard this he became quite sad, for he was very rich.
On Riches and Renunciation. 
    24: Jesus looked at him  and said, “How hard it is for those who have wealth to enter the kingdom of God! 
    25: For it is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle than for a rich person to enter the kingdom of God.” 
    26: Those who heard this said, “Then who can be saved?” 
    27: And he said, “What is impossible for human beings is possible for God.” 
    28: Then Peter said, “We have given up our possessions and followed you.” 
    29: He said to them, “Amen, I say to you, there is no one who has given up house or wife or brothers or parents or children for the sake of the kingdom of God 
    30: who will not receive  an overabundant return in this present age and eternal life in the age to come.”
The Third Prediction of the Passion. 
    31: Then he took the Twelve aside and said to them, “Behold, we are going up to Jerusalem and everything written by the prophets about the Son of Man will be fulfilled.[g] 
    32: He will be handed over to the Gentiles and he will be mocked and insulted and spat upon; 
    33: and after they have scourged him they will kill him, but on the third day he will rise.” 
    34: But they understood nothing of this; the word remained hidden from them and they failed to comprehend what he said.
The Healing of the Blind Beggar. 
    35: Now as he approached Jericho a blind man was sitting by the roadside begging, 
    36: and hearing a crowd going by, he inquired what was happening. 
    37: They told him, “Jesus of Nazareth is passing by.” 
    38: He shouted, “Jesus, Son of David, have pity on me!” 
    39: The people walking in front rebuked him, telling him to be silent, but he kept calling out all the more, “Son of David, have pity on me!” 
    40: Then Jesus stopped and ordered that he be brought to him; and when he came near, Jesus asked him, 
    41: “What do you want me to do for you?” He replied, “Lord, please let me see.” 
    42: Jesus told him, “Have sight; your faith has saved you.” 
    43: He immediately received his sight and followed him, giving glory to God. When they saw this, all the people gave praise to God.


  Chapter 19.

    1: 
Zacchaeus the Tax Collector. 1 He came to Jericho and intended to pass through the town. 
    2: Now a man there named Zacchaeus, who was a chief tax collector and also a wealthy man, 
    3: was seeking to see who Jesus was; but he could not see him because of the crowd, for he was short in stature. 
    4: So he ran ahead and climbed a sycamore tree in order to see Jesus, who was about to pass that way. 
    5: When he reached the place, Jesus looked up and said to him, “Zacchaeus, come down quickly, for today I must stay at your house.” 
    6: And he came down quickly and received him with joy. 
    7: When they all saw this, they began to grumble, saying, “He has gone to stay at the house of a sinner.” 
    8: 
    9: acchaeus the Tax Collector. 1 He came to Jericho and intended to pass through the town. 2 Now a man there named Zacchaeus, who was a chief tax collector and also a wealthy man, 3 was seeking to see who Jesus was; but he could not see him because of the crowd, for he was short in stature. 4 So he ran ahead and climbed a sycamore tree in order to see Jesus, who was about to pass that way. 5 When he reached the place, Jesus looked up and said to him, “Zacchaeus, come down quickly, for today I must stay at your house.” 6 And he came down quickly and received him with joy. 7 When they all saw this, they began to grumble, saying, “He has gone to stay at the house of a sinner.” 8 But Zacchaeus stood there and said to the Lord, “Behold, half of my possessions, Lord, I shall give to the poor, and if I have extorted anything from anyone I shall repay it four times over.” 9 [b]And Jesus said to him, “Today salvation has come to this house because this man too is a descendant of Abraham. 
    10: For the Son of Man has come to seek and to save what was lost.”
The Parable of the Ten Gold Coins.[d] 
    11: While they were listening to him speak, he proceeded to tell a parable because he was near Jerusalem and they thought that the kingdom of God would appear there immediately. 
    12: So he said, “A nobleman went off to a distant country to obtain the kingship for himself and then to return. 
    13: He called ten of his servants and gave them ten gold coins and told them, ‘Engage in trade with these until I return.’ 
    14: His fellow citizens, however, despised him and sent a delegation after him to announce, ‘We do not want this man to be our king.’ 
    15: But when he returned after obtaining the kingship, he had the servants called, to whom he had given the money, to learn what they had gained by trading. 
    16: The first came forward and said, ‘Sir, your gold coin has earned ten additional ones.’ 
    17: He replied, ‘Well done, good servant! You have been faithful in this very small matter; take charge of ten cities.’ 
    18: 
    19: Zacchaeus the Tax Collector. 1 He came to Jericho and intended to pass through the town. 2 Now a man there named Zacchaeus, who was a chief tax collector and also a wealthy man, 3 was seeking to see who Jesus was; but he could not see him because of the crowd, for he was short in stature. 4 So he ran ahead and climbed a sycamore tree in order to see Jesus, who was about to pass that way. 5 When he reached the place, Jesus looked up and said to him, “Zacchaeus, come down quickly, for today I must stay at your house.” 6 And he came down quickly and received him with joy. 7 When they all saw this, they began to grumble, saying, “He has gone to stay at the house of a sinner.” 8 But Zacchaeus stood there and said to the Lord, “Behold, half of my possessions, Lord, I shall give to the poor, and if I have extorted anything from anyone I shall repay it four times over.” 9 [b]And Jesus said to him, “Today salvation has come to this house because this man too is a descendant of Abraham. 10 [c]For the Son of Man has come to seek and to save what was lost.”
The Parable of the Ten Gold Coins.[d] 11 While they were listening to him speak, he proceeded to tell a parable because he was near Jerusalem and they thought that the kingdom of God would appear there immediately. 12 So he said, “A nobleman went off to a distant country to obtain the kingship for himself and then to return. 13 He called ten of his servants and gave them ten gold coins[e] and told them, ‘Engage in trade with these until I return.’ 14 His fellow citizens, however, despised him and sent a delegation after him to announce, ‘We do not want this man to be our king.’ 15 But when he returned after obtaining the kingship, he had the servants called, to whom he had given the money, to learn what they had gained by trading. 16 The first came forward and said, ‘Sir, your gold coin has earned ten additional ones.’ 17 He replied, ‘Well done, good servant! You have been faithful in this very small matter; take charge of ten cities.’ 18 Then the second came and reported, ‘Your gold coin, sir, has earned five more.’ 19 And to this servant too he said, ‘You, take charge of five cities.’ 
    20: Then the other servant came and said, ‘Sir, here is your gold coin; I kept it stored away in a handkerchief, 
    21: for I was afraid of you, because you are a demanding person; you take up what you did not lay down and you harvest what you did not plant.’ 
    22: He said to him, ‘With your own words I shall condemn you, you wicked servant. You knew I was a demanding person, taking up what I did not lay down and harvesting what I did not plant; 
    23: why did you not put my money in a bank? Then on my return I would have collected it with interest.’ 
    24: And to those standing by he said, ‘Take the gold coin from him and give it to the servant who has ten.’ 
    25: But they said to him, ‘Sir, he has ten gold coins.’ 
    26: ‘I tell you, to everyone who has, more will be given, but from the one who has not, even what he has will be taken away. 
    27: Now as for those enemies of mine who did not want me as their king, bring them here and slay them before me.’”
VI. The Teaching Ministry in Jerusalem
The Entry into Jerusalem. 
    28: After he had said this, he proceeded on his journey up to Jerusalem. 
    29: As he drew near to Bethphage and Bethany at the place called the Mount of Olives, he sent two of his disciples. 
    30: He said, “Go into the village opposite you, and as you enter it you will find a colt tethered on which no one has ever sat. Untie it and bring it here. 
    31: And if anyone should ask you, ‘Why are you untying it?’ you will answer, ‘The Master has need of it.’” 
    32: So those who had been sent went off and found everything just as he had told them. 
    33: And as they were untying the colt, its owners said to them, “Why are you untying this colt?” 
    34: They answered, “The Master has need of it.” 
    35: So they brought it to Jesus, threw their cloaks over the colt, and helped Jesus to mount. 
    36: As he rode along, the people were spreading their cloaks on the road; 
    37: and now as he was approaching the slope of the Mount of Olives, the whole multitude of his disciples began to praise God aloud with joy for all the mighty deeds they had seen. 
    38: They proclaimed:
“Blessed is the king
    who comes in the name of the Lord.
Peace in heaven
    and glory in the highest.”

    39: Some of the Pharisees in the crowd said to him, “Teacher, rebuke your disciples.” 
    40: He said in reply, “I tell you, if they keep silent, the stones will cry out!”
The Lament for Jerusalem. 
    41: As he drew near, he saw the city and wept over it, 
    42: saying, “If this day you only knew what makes for peace—but now it is hidden from your eyes. 
    43: For the days are coming upon you when your enemies will raise a palisade against you; they will encircle you and hem you in on all sides. 
    44: They will smash you to the ground and your children within you, and they will not leave one stone upon another within you because you did not recognize the time of your visitation.”
The Cleansing of the Temple. 
    45: Then Jesus entered the temple area and proceeded to drive out those who were selling things, 
    46: saying to them, “It is written, ‘My house shall be a house of prayer, but you have made it a den of thieves.’” 
    47: And every day he was teaching in the temple area. The chief priests, the scribes, and the leaders of the people, meanwhile, were seeking to put him to death, 
    48: but they could find no way to accomplish their purpose because all the people were hanging on his words.


  Chapter 20.

    1: 
    2: 
The Authority of Jesus Questioned. 1 One day as he was teaching the people in the temple area and proclaiming the good news, the chief priests and scribes, together with the elders, approached him 2 and said to him, “Tell us, by what authority are you doing these things? Or who is the one who gave you this authority?” 
    3: He said to them in reply, “I shall ask you a question. Tell me, 
    4: was John’s baptism of heavenly or of human origin?” 
    5: They discussed this among themselves, and said, “If we say, ‘Of heavenly origin,’ he will say, ‘Why did you not believe him?’ 
    6: But if we say, ‘Of human origin,’ then all the people will stone us, for they are convinced that John was a prophet.” 
    7: So they answered that they did not know from where it came. 
    8: Then Jesus said to them, “Neither shall I tell you by what authority I do these things.”
The Parable of the Tenant Farmers. 
    9: hen he proceeded to tell the people this parable. “ man planted a vineyard, leased it to tenant farmers, and then went on a journey for a long time. 
    10: At harvest time he sent a servant to the tenant farmers to receive some of the produce of the vineyard. But they beat the servant and sent him away empty-handed. 
    11: So he proceeded to send another servant, but him also they beat and insulted and sent away empty-handed. 
    12: Then he proceeded to send a third, but this one too they wounded and threw out. 
    13: The owner of the vineyard said, ‘What shall I do? I shall send my beloved son; maybe they will respect him.’ 
    14: But when the tenant farmers saw him they said to one another, ‘This is the heir. Let us kill him that the inheritance may become ours.’ 
    15: So they threw him out of the vineyard and killed him. What will the owner of the vineyard do to them? 
    16: He will come and put those tenant farmers to death and turn over the vineyard to others.” When the people heard this, they exclaimed, “Let it not be so!” 
    17: But he looked at them and asked, “What then does this scripture passage mean:
‘The stone which the builders rejected
    has become the cornerstone’?

    18: Everyone who falls on that stone will be dashed to pieces; and it will crush anyone on whom it falls.” 
    19: 
    20: a]
The Authority of Jesus Questioned. 1 One day as he was teaching the people in the temple area and proclaiming the good news, the chief priests and scribes, together with the elders, approached him 2 and said to him, “Tell us, by what authority are you doing these things? Or who is the one who gave you this authority?” 3 He said to them in reply, “I shall ask you a question. Tell me, 4 was John’s baptism of heavenly or of human origin?” 5 They discussed this among themselves, and said, “If we say, ‘Of heavenly origin,’ he will say, ‘Why did you not believe him?’ 6 But if we say, ‘Of human origin,’ then all the people will stone us, for they are convinced that John was a prophet.” 7 So they answered that they did not know from where it came. 8 Then Jesus said to them, “Neither shall I tell you by what authority I do these things.”
The Parable of the Tenant Farmers.[b] 9 Then he proceeded to tell the people this parable. “[A] man planted a vineyard, leased it to tenant farmers, and then went on a journey for a long time. 10 At harvest time he sent a servant to the tenant farmers to receive some of the produce of the vineyard. But they beat the servant and sent him away empty-handed. 11 So he proceeded to send another servant, but him also they beat and insulted and sent away empty-handed. 12 Then he proceeded to send a third, but this one too they wounded and threw out. 13 The owner of the vineyard said, ‘What shall I do? I shall send my beloved son; maybe they will respect him.’ 14 But when the tenant farmers saw him they said to one another, ‘This is the heir. Let us kill him that the inheritance may become ours.’ 15 So they threw him out of the vineyard and killed him.[c] What will the owner of the vineyard do to them? 16 He will come and put those tenant farmers to death and turn over the vineyard to others.” When the people heard this, they exclaimed, “Let it not be so!” 17 But he looked at them and asked, “What then does this scripture passage mean:
‘The stone which the builders rejected
    has become the cornerstone’?
18 Everyone who falls on that stone will be dashed to pieces; and it will crush anyone on whom it falls.” 19 The scribes and chief priests sought to lay their hands on him at that very hour, but they feared the people, for they knew that he had addressed this parable to them.
Paying Taxes to the Emperor. 20 [d]They watched him closely and sent agents pretending to be righteous who were to trap him in speech, in order to hand him over to the authority and power of the governor. 
    21: They posed this question to him, “Teacher, we know that what you say and teach is correct, and you show no partiality, but teach the way of God in accordance with the truth. 
    22: Is it lawful for us to pay tribute to Caesar or not?” 
    23: Recognizing their craftiness he said to them, 
    24: “Show me a denarius; whose image and name does it bear?” They replied, “Caesar’s.” 
    25: So he said to them, “Then repay to Caesar what belongs to Caesar and to God what belongs to God.” 
    26: They were unable to trap him by something he might say before the people, and so amazed were they at his reply that they fell silent.
The Question About the Resurrection. 
    27: Some Sadducees, those who deny that there is a resurrection, came forward and put this question to him, 
    28: saying, “Teacher, Moses wrote for us, ‘If someone’s brother dies leaving a wife but no child, his brother must take the wife and raise up descendants for his brother.’ 
    29: Now there were seven brothers; the first married a woman but died childless. 
    30: Then the second 
    31: and the third married her, and likewise all the seven died childless. 
    32: Finally the woman also died. 
    33: Now at the resurrection whose wife will that woman be? For all seven had been married to her.” 
    34: Jesus said to them, “The children of this age marry and are given in marriage; 
    35: but those who are deemed worthy to attain to the coming age and to the resurrection of the dead neither marry nor are given in marriage. 
    36: They can no longer die, for they are like angels; and they are the children of God because they are the ones who will rise. 
    37: That the dead will rise even Moses made known in the passage about the bush, when he called ‘Lord’ the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; 
    38: and he is not God of the dead, but of the living, for to him all are alive.” 
    39: Some of the scribes said in reply, “Teacher, you have answered well.” 
    40: And they no longer dared to ask him anything.
The Question About David’s Son. 
    41: Then he said to them, “How do they claim that the Messiah is the Son of David? 
    42: For David himself in the Book of Psalms says:
‘The Lord said to my lord,
“Sit at my right hand

    43: 
    till I make your enemies your footstool.”’

    44: Now if David calls him ‘lord,’ how can he be his son?”
Denunciation of the Scribes. 
    45: Then, within the hearing of all the people, he said to  disciples, 
    46: “Be on guard against the scribes, who like to go around in long robes and love greetings in marketplaces, seats of honor in synagogues, and places of honor at banquets. 
    47: They devour the houses of widows and, as a pretext, recite lengthy prayers. They will receive a very severe condemnation.”


End of day 298.