Day 22:

Reading Exodus, chapters ['33', '34', '35', '36']:

  Chapter 33.

    1: The Lord spoke to Moses: Go! You and the people whom you have brought up from the land of Egypt are to go up from here to the land about which I swore to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: I will give it to your descendants. 
    2: 
    3: 
1 The Lord spoke to Moses: Go! You and the people whom you have brought up from the land of Egypt are to go up from here to the land about which I swore to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: I will give it to your descendants. 2 Driving out the Canaanites, Amorites, Hittites, Perizzites, Hivites and Jebusites, I will send an angel before you 3 to a land flowing with milk and honey. But I myself will not go up in your company, because you are a stiff-necked people; otherwise I might consume you on the way. 
    4: When the people heard this painful news, they mourned, and no one wore any ornaments.

    5: The Lord spoke to Moses: Speak to the Israelites: You are a stiff-necked people. Were I to go up in your company even for a moment, I would destroy you. Now off with your ornaments! Let me think what to do with you. 
    6: So, from Mount Horeb onward, the Israelites stripped off their ornaments.
Moses’ Intimacy with God. 
    7: Moses used to pitch a tent outside the camp at some distance. It was called the tent of meeting. Anyone who wished to consult the Lord would go to the tent of meeting outside the camp. 
    8: Whenever Moses went out to the tent, the people would all rise and stand at the entrance of their own tents, watching Moses until he entered the tent. 
    9: s Moses entered the tent, the column of cloud would come down and stand at its entrance while the Lord spoke with Moses. 
    10: On seeing the column of cloud stand at the entrance of the tent, all the people would rise and bow down at the entrance of their own tents. 
    11: The Lord used to speak to Moses face to face, as a person speaks to a friend. Moses would then return to the camp, but his young assistant, Joshua, son of Nun, never left the tent. 
    12: Moses said to the Lord, “See, you are telling me: Lead this people. But you have not let me know whom you will send with me. Yet you have said: You are my intimate friend; You have found favor with me. 
    13: Now, if I have found favor with you, please let me know your ways so that, in knowing you, I may continue to find favor with you. See, this nation is indeed your own people. 
    14: The Lord answered: I myself will go along, to give you rest. 
    15: Moses replied, “If you are not going yourself, do not make us go up from here. 
    16: For how can it be known that I and your people have found favor with you, except by your going with us? Then we, your people and I, will be singled out from every other people on the surface of the earth.” 
    17: The Lord said to Moses: This request, too, which you have made, I will carry out, because you have found favor with me and you are my intimate friend.

    18: Then Moses said, “Please let me see your glory!” 
    19: The Lord answered: I will make all my goodness pass before you, and I will proclaim my name, “Lord,” before you; I who show favor to whom I will, I who grant mercy to whom I will. 
    20: But you cannot see my face, for no one can see me and live. 
    21: Here, continued the Lord, is a place near me where you shall station yourself on the rock. 
    22: When my glory passes I will set you in the cleft of the rock and will cover you with my hand until I have passed by. 
    23: Then I will remove my hand, so that you may see my back; but my face may not be seen.


  Chapter 34.

    1: The Lord said to Moses: “Cut two stone tablets like the former, that I may write on them the words which were on the former tablets that you broke. 
    2: 
    3: 
    4: Renewal of the Tablets. 1 The Lord said to Moses: “Cut two stone tablets like the former, that I may write on them the words which were on the former tablets that you broke. 2 Get ready for tomorrow morning, when you are to go up Mount Sinai and there present yourself to me on the top of the mountain. 3 No one shall come up with you, and let no one even be seen on any part of the mountain; even the sheep and the cattle are not to graze in front of this mountain.” 4 Moses then cut two stone tablets like the former, and early the next morning he went up Mount Sinai as the Lord had commanded him, taking in his hand the two stone tablets.

    5: The Lord came down in a cloud and stood with him there and proclaimed the name, “Lord.” 
    6: So the Lord passed before him and proclaimed: The Lord, the Lord, a God gracious and merciful, slow to anger and abounding in love and fidelity, 
    7: continuing his love for a thousand generations, and forgiving wickedness, rebellion, and sin; yet not declaring the guilty guiltless, but bringing punishment for their parents’ wickedness on children and children’s children to the third and fourth generation! 
    8: Moses at once knelt and bowed down to the ground. 
    9: hen he said, “If I find favor with you, Lord, please, Lord, come along in our company. This is indeed a stiff-necked people; yet pardon our wickedness and sins, and claim us as your own.”
Religious Laws. 
    10: The Lord said: Here is the covenant I will make. Before all your people I will perform marvels never before done in any nation anywhere on earth, so that all the people among whom you live may see the work of the Lord. Awe-inspiring are the deeds I will perform with you! 
    11: As for you, observe what I am commanding you today.
See, I am about to drive out before you the Amorites, Canaanites, Hittites, Perizzites, Hivites and Jebusites. 
    12: Take care not to make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land that you are to enter; lest they become a snare among you. 
    13: Tear down their altars; smash their sacred stones, and cut down their asherahs. 
    14: You shall not bow down to any other god, for the Lord—“Jealous” his name—is a jealous God. 
    15: Do not make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land; else, when they prostitute themselves with their gods and sacrifice to them, one of them may invite you and you may partake of the sacrifice. 
    16: And when you take their daughters as wives for your sons, and their daughters prostitute themselves with their gods, they will make your sons do the same.

    17: You shall not make for yourselves molten gods.

    18: You shall keep the festival of Unleavened Bread. For seven days at the appointed time in the month of Abib you are to eat unleavened bread, as I commanded you; for in the month of Abib you came out of Egypt.

    19: To me belongs every male that opens the womb among all your livestock, whether in the herd or in the flock. 
    20: The firstling of a donkey you shall redeem with a lamb; if you do not redeem it, you must break its neck. The firstborn among your sons you shall redeem.
No one shall appear before me empty-handed.

    21: Six days you may labor, but on the seventh day you shall rest; even during the seasons of plowing and harvesting you must rest.

    22: You shall keep the feast of Weeks with the first fruits of the wheat harvest, likewise, the feast of the Ingathering at the close of the year. 
    23: Three times a year all your men shall appear before the Lord, the Lord God of Israel. 
    24: Since I will drive out the nations before you and enlarge your territory, no one will covet your land when you go up three times a year to appear before the Lord, your God.

    25: You shall not offer me the blood of sacrifice with anything leavened, nor shall the sacrifice of the Passover feast be kept overnight for the next day.

    26: The choicest first fruits of your soil you shall bring to the house of the Lord, your God.
You shall not boil a young goat in its mother’s milk.
Radiance of Moses’ Face. 
    27: Then the Lord said to Moses: Write down these words, for in accordance with these words I have made a covenant with you and with Israel. 
    28: So Moses was there with the Lord for forty days and forty nights, without eating any food or drinking any water, and he wrote on the tablets the words of the covenant, the ten words.

    29: As Moses came down from Mount Sinai with the two tablets of the covenant in his hands, he did not know that the skin of his face had become radiant while he spoke with the Lord. 
    30: When Aaron, then, and the other Israelites saw Moses and noticed how radiant the skin of his face had become, they were afraid to come near him. 
    31: Only after Moses called to them did Aaron and all the leaders of the community come back to him. Moses then spoke to them. 
    32: Later, all the Israelites came up to him, and he enjoined on them all that the Lord had told him on Mount Sinai. 
    33: 
    34: Renewal of the Tablets. 1 The Lord said to Moses: “Cut two stone tablets like the former, that I may write on them the words which were on the former tablets that you broke. 2 Get ready for tomorrow morning, when you are to go up Mount Sinai and there present yourself to me on the top of the mountain. 3 No one shall come up with you, and let no one even be seen on any part of the mountain; even the sheep and the cattle are not to graze in front of this mountain.” 4 Moses then cut two stone tablets like the former, and early the next morning he went up Mount Sinai as the Lord had commanded him, taking in his hand the two stone tablets.
5 The Lord came down in a cloud and stood with him there and proclaimed the name, “Lord.” 6 So the Lord passed before him and proclaimed: The Lord, the Lord, a God gracious and merciful, slow to anger and abounding in love and fidelity,[b] 7 continuing his love for a thousand generations, and forgiving wickedness, rebellion, and sin; yet not declaring the guilty guiltless, but bringing punishment for their parents’ wickedness on children and children’s children to the third and fourth generation! 8 Moses at once knelt and bowed down to the ground. 9 Then he said, “If I find favor with you, Lord, please, Lord, come along in our company. This is indeed a stiff-necked people; yet pardon our wickedness and sins, and claim us as your own.”
Religious Laws. 10 The Lord said: Here is the covenant I will make. Before all your people I will perform marvels never before done[c] in any nation anywhere on earth, so that all the people among whom you live may see the work of the Lord. Awe-inspiring are the deeds I will perform with you! 11 As for you, observe what I am commanding you today.
See, I am about to drive out before you the Amorites, Canaanites, Hittites, Perizzites, Hivites and Jebusites. 12 Take care not to make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land that you are to enter; lest they become a snare among you. 13 Tear down their altars; smash their sacred stones, and cut down their asherahs.[d] 14 You shall not bow down to any other god, for the Lord—“Jealous”[e] his name—is a jealous God. 15 Do not make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land; else, when they prostitute themselves with their gods and sacrifice to them, one of them may invite you and you may partake of the sacrifice. 16 And when you take their daughters as wives for your sons, and their daughters prostitute themselves with their gods, they will make your sons do the same.
17 You shall not make for yourselves molten gods.
18 You shall keep the festival of Unleavened Bread. For seven days at the appointed time in the month of Abib you are to eat unleavened bread, as I commanded you; for in the month of Abib you came out of Egypt.
19 To me belongs every male that opens the womb among all your livestock, whether in the herd or in the flock. 20 The firstling of a donkey you shall redeem with a lamb; if you do not redeem it, you must break its neck. The firstborn among your sons you shall redeem.
No one shall appear before me empty-handed.
21 Six days you may labor, but on the seventh day you shall rest; even during the seasons of plowing and harvesting you must rest.
22 You shall keep the feast of Weeks with the first fruits of the wheat harvest, likewise, the feast of the Ingathering at the close of the year.[f] 23 Three times a year all your men shall appear before the Lord, the Lord God of Israel. 24 Since I will drive out the nations before you and enlarge your territory, no one will covet your land when you go up three times a year to appear before the Lord, your God.
25 You shall not offer me the blood of sacrifice with anything leavened, nor shall the sacrifice of the Passover feast be kept overnight for the next day.
26 The choicest first fruits of your soil you shall bring to the house of the Lord, your God.
You shall not boil a young goat in its mother’s milk.
Radiance of Moses’ Face. 27 Then the Lord said to Moses: Write down these words, for in accordance with these words I have made a covenant with you and with Israel. 28 So Moses was there with the Lord for forty days and forty nights, without eating any food or drinking any water, and he wrote on the tablets the words of the covenant, the ten words.
29 As Moses came down from Mount Sinai with the two tablets of the covenant in his hands, he did not know that the skin of his face had become radiant[g] while he spoke with the Lord. 30 When Aaron, then, and the other Israelites saw Moses and noticed how radiant the skin of his face had become, they were afraid to come near him. 31 Only after Moses called to them did Aaron and all the leaders of the community come back to him. Moses then spoke to them. 32 Later, all the Israelites came up to him, and he enjoined on them all that the Lord had told him on Mount Sinai. 33 When Moses finished speaking with them, he put a veil over his face. 34 Whenever Moses entered the presence of the Lord to speak with him, he removed the veil until he came out again. On coming out, he would tell the Israelites all that he had been commanded. 
    35: Then the Israelites would see that the skin of Moses’ face was radiant; so he would again put the veil over his face until he went in to speak with the Lord.


  Chapter 35.

    1: Moses assembled the whole Israelite community and said to them, “These are the words the Lord has commanded to be observed. 
    2: 
    3: 
Sabbath Regulations. 1 Moses assembled the whole Israelite community and said to them, “These are the words the Lord has commanded to be observed. 2 On six days work may be done, but the seventh day shall be holy to you as the sabbath of complete rest to the Lord. Anyone who does work on that day shall be put to death. 3 You shall not even light a fire in any of your dwellings on the sabbath day.”
Collection of Materials. 
    4: 
    5: Sabbath Regulations. 1 Moses assembled the whole Israelite community and said to them, “These are the words the Lord has commanded to be observed. 2 On six days work may be done, but the seventh day shall be holy to you as the sabbath of complete rest to the Lord. Anyone who does work on that day shall be put to death. 3 You shall not even light a fire in any of your dwellings on the sabbath day.”
Collection of Materials. 4 Moses said to the whole Israelite community, “This is what the Lord has commanded: 5 Receive from among you contributions for the Lord. Everyone, as his heart prompts him, shall bring, as a contribution to the Lord, gold, silver, and bronze; 
    6: violet, purple, and scarlet yarn; fine linen and goat hair; 
    7: rams’ skins dyed red, and tahash skins; acacia wood; 
    8: oil for the light; spices for the anointing oil and for the fragrant incense; 
    9: nyx stones and other gems for mounting on the ephod and on the breastpiece.
Call for Artisans. 
    10: “Let every artisan among you come and make all that the Lord has commanded: 
    11: the tabernacle, with its tent, its covering, its clasps, its frames, its bars, its columns, and its pedestals; 
    12: the ark, with its poles, the cover, and the curtain veil; 
    13: the table, with its poles and all its utensils, and the showbread; 
    14: the menorah, with its utensils, the lamps, and the oil for the light; 
    15: the altar of incense, with its poles; the anointing oil, and the fragrant incense; the entrance curtain for the entrance of the tabernacle; 
    16: the altar for burnt offerings, with its bronze grating, its poles, and all its utensils; the basin, with its stand; 
    17: the hangings of the court, with their columns and pedestals; the curtain for the gate of the court; 
    18: the tent pegs for the tabernacle and for the court, with their ropes; 
    19: the service cloths for use in the sanctuary; the sacred vestments for Aaron, the priest, and the vestments for his sons in their ministry.”
The Contribution. 
    20: When the whole Israelite community left Moses’ presence, 
    21: all, as their hearts moved them and their spirit prompted, brought a contribution to the Lord for the work of the tent of meeting, for all its services, and for the sacred vestments. 
    22: Both the men and the women, all as their heart prompted them, brought brooches, earrings, rings, necklaces, and various other gold articles. Everyone who could presented an offering of gold to the Lord. 
    23: Everyone who happened to have violet, purple, or scarlet yarn, fine linen or goat hair, rams’ skins dyed red or tahash skins, brought them. 
    24: Whoever could make a contribution of silver or bronze offered it to the Lord; and everyone who happened to have acacia wood for any part of the work, brought it. 
    25: All the women who were expert spinners brought hand-spun violet, purple, and scarlet yarn and fine linen thread. 
    26: All the women, as their hearts and skills moved them, spun goat hair. 
    27: The tribal leaders brought onyx stones and other gems for mounting on the ephod and on the breastpiece; 
    28: as well as spices, and oil for the light, anointing oil, and fragrant incense. 
    29: Every Israelite man and woman brought to the Lord such voluntary offerings as they thought best, for the various kinds of work which the Lord, through Moses, had commanded to be done.
The Artisans. 
    30: Moses said to the Israelites: “See, the Lord has singled out Bezalel, son of Uri, son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah, 
    31: and has filled him with a divine spirit of skill and understanding and knowledge in every craft: 
    32: in the production of embroidery, in making things of gold, silver, or bronze, 
    33: in cutting and mounting precious stones, in carving wood, and in every other craft. 
    34: 
    35: Sabbath Regulations. 1 Moses assembled the whole Israelite community and said to them, “These are the words the Lord has commanded to be observed. 2 On six days work may be done, but the seventh day shall be holy to you as the sabbath of complete rest to the Lord. Anyone who does work on that day shall be put to death. 3 You shall not even light a fire in any of your dwellings on the sabbath day.”
Collection of Materials. 4 Moses said to the whole Israelite community, “This is what the Lord has commanded: 5 Receive from among you contributions for the Lord. Everyone, as his heart prompts him, shall bring, as a contribution to the Lord, gold, silver, and bronze; 6 violet, purple, and scarlet yarn; fine linen and goat hair; 7 rams’ skins dyed red, and tahash skins; acacia wood; 8 oil for the light; spices for the anointing oil and for the fragrant incense; 9 onyx stones and other gems for mounting on the ephod and on the breastpiece.
Call for Artisans. 10 “Let every artisan among you come and make all that the Lord has commanded: 11 the tabernacle, with its tent, its covering, its clasps, its frames, its bars, its columns, and its pedestals; 12 the ark, with its poles, the cover, and the curtain veil; 13 the table, with its poles and all its utensils, and the showbread; 14 the menorah, with its utensils, the lamps, and the oil for the light; 15 the altar of incense, with its poles; the anointing oil, and the fragrant incense; the entrance curtain for the entrance of the tabernacle; 16 the altar for burnt offerings, with its bronze grating, its poles, and all its utensils; the basin, with its stand; 17 the hangings of the court, with their columns and pedestals; the curtain for the gate of the court; 18 the tent pegs for the tabernacle and for the court, with their ropes; 19 the service cloths for use in the sanctuary; the sacred vestments for Aaron, the priest, and the vestments for his sons in their ministry.”
The Contribution. 20 When the whole Israelite community left Moses’ presence, 21 all, as their hearts moved them and their spirit prompted, brought a contribution to the Lord for the work of the tent of meeting, for all its services, and for the sacred vestments. 22 Both the men and the women, all as their heart prompted them, brought brooches, earrings, rings, necklaces, and various other gold articles. Everyone who could presented an offering of gold to the Lord. 23 Everyone who happened to have violet, purple, or scarlet yarn, fine linen or goat hair, rams’ skins dyed red or tahash skins, brought them. 24 Whoever could make a contribution of silver or bronze offered it to the Lord; and everyone who happened to have acacia wood for any part of the work, brought it. 25 All the women who were expert spinners brought hand-spun violet, purple, and scarlet yarn and fine linen thread. 26 All the women, as their hearts and skills moved them, spun goat hair. 27 The tribal leaders brought onyx stones and other gems for mounting on the ephod and on the breastpiece; 28 as well as spices, and oil for the light, anointing oil, and fragrant incense. 29 Every Israelite man and woman brought to the Lord such voluntary offerings as they thought best, for the various kinds of work which the Lord, through Moses, had commanded to be done.
The Artisans. 30 Moses said to the Israelites: “See, the Lord has singled out Bezalel, son of Uri, son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah, 31 and has filled him with a divine spirit of skill and understanding and knowledge in every craft: 32 in the production of embroidery, in making things of gold, silver, or bronze, 33 in cutting and mounting precious stones, in carving wood, and in every other craft. 34 He has also given both him and Oholiab, son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, the ability to teach others. 35 He has endowed them with skill to execute all types of work: engraving, embroidering, the making of variegated cloth of violet, purple, and scarlet yarn and fine linen thread, weaving, and all other arts and crafts.
New American Bible (Revised Edition) (NABRE)
Scripture texts, prefaces, introductions, footnotes and cross references used in this work are taken from the New American Bible, revised edition © 2010, 1991, 1986, 1970 Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, DC All Rights Reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the copyright owner.

  Chapter 36.

    1: “Bezalel, therefore, will set to work with Oholiab and with all the artisans whom the Lord has endowed with skill and understanding in knowing how to do all the work for the service of the sanctuary, just as the Lord has commanded.”

    2: 
    3: 
1 “Bezalel, therefore, will set to work with Oholiab and with all the artisans whom the Lord has endowed with skill and understanding in knowing how to do all the work for the service of the sanctuary, just as the Lord has commanded.”
2 Moses then called Bezalel and Oholiab and all the other artisans whom the Lord had endowed with skill, men whose hearts moved them to come and do the work. 3 They received from Moses all the contributions which the Israelites had brought for the work to be done for the sanctuary service. Still, morning after morning the people continued to bring their voluntary offerings to Moses. 
    4: Thereupon all the artisans who were doing the work for the sanctuary came from the work each was doing, 
    5: 
    6: 1 “Bezalel, therefore, will set to work with Oholiab and with all the artisans whom the Lord has endowed with skill and understanding in knowing how to do all the work for the service of the sanctuary, just as the Lord has commanded.”
2 Moses then called Bezalel and Oholiab and all the other artisans whom the Lord had endowed with skill, men whose hearts moved them to come and do the work. 3 They received from Moses all the contributions which the Israelites had brought for the work to be done for the sanctuary service. Still, morning after morning the people continued to bring their voluntary offerings to Moses. 4 Thereupon all the artisans who were doing the work for the sanctuary came from the work each was doing, 5 and told Moses, “The people are bringing much more than is needed to carry out the work which the Lord has commanded us to do.” 6 Moses, therefore, ordered a proclamation to be made throughout the camp: “Let neither man nor woman make any more contributions for the sanctuary.” So the people stopped bringing their offerings; 
    7: there was already enough at hand, and more than enough, to complete the work to be done.
The Tent Cloth and Coverings. 
    8: The various artisans who were doing the work made the tabernacle with its ten sheets woven of fine linen twined, having cherubim embroidered on them with violet, purple, and scarlet yarn. 
    9: he length of each sheet was twenty-eight cubits, and the width four cubits; all the sheets were the same size. 
    10: Five of the sheets were joined together, edge to edge; and the other five sheets likewise, edge to edge. 
    11: Loops of violet yarn were made along the edge of the end sheet in the first set, and the same along the edge of the end sheet in the second set. 
    12: Fifty loops were thus put on one inner sheet, and fifty loops on the inner sheet in the other set, with the loops directly opposite each other. 
    13: Then fifty clasps of gold were made, with which the sheets were joined so that the tabernacle formed one whole.

    14: Sheets of goat hair were also woven as a tent over the tabernacle. Eleven such sheets were made. 
    15: The length of each sheet was thirty cubits and the width four cubits; all eleven sheets were the same size. 
    16: Five of these sheets were joined into one set, and the other six sheets into another set. 
    17: Fifty loops were made along the edge of the end sheet in one set, and fifty loops along the edge of the corresponding sheet in the other set. 
    18: Fifty bronze clasps were made with which the tent was joined so that it formed one whole. 
    19: A covering for the tent was made of rams’ skins dyed red and, above that, a covering of tahash skins.
The Framework. 
    20: Frames were made for the tabernacle, acacia-wood uprights. 
    21: The length of each frame was ten cubits, and the width one and a half cubits. 
    22: Each frame had two arms, fastening them one to another. In this way all the frames of the tabernacle were made. 
    23: The frames for the tabernacle were made as follows: twenty frames on the south side, 
    24: with forty silver pedestals under the twenty frames, two pedestals under each frame for its two arms; 
    25: twenty frames on the other side of the tabernacle, the north side, 
    26: with their forty silver pedestals, two pedestals under each frame. 
    27: At the rear of the tabernacle, to the west, six frames were made, 
    28: and two frames were made for the corners of the tabernacle, at its rear. 
    29: These were double at the bottom, and likewise double at the top, to the first ring. That is how both corner frames were made. 
    30: Thus, there were eight frames, with their sixteen silver pedestals, two pedestals under each frame. 
    31: Bars of acacia wood were also made, five for the frames on one side of the tabernacle, 
    32: five for those on the other side, and five for those at the rear, to the west. 
    33: The center bar, at the middle of the frames, was made to reach across from end to end. 
    34: The frames were plated with gold, and gold rings were made on them as holders for the bars, which were also plated with gold.
The Veil. 
    35: 
    36: 1 “Bezalel, therefore, will set to work with Oholiab and with all the artisans whom the Lord has endowed with skill and understanding in knowing how to do all the work for the service of the sanctuary, just as the Lord has commanded.”
2 Moses then called Bezalel and Oholiab and all the other artisans whom the Lord had endowed with skill, men whose hearts moved them to come and do the work. 3 They received from Moses all the contributions which the Israelites had brought for the work to be done for the sanctuary service. Still, morning after morning the people continued to bring their voluntary offerings to Moses. 4 Thereupon all the artisans who were doing the work for the sanctuary came from the work each was doing, 5 and told Moses, “The people are bringing much more than is needed to carry out the work which the Lord has commanded us to do.” 6 Moses, therefore, ordered a proclamation to be made throughout the camp: “Let neither man nor woman make any more contributions for the sanctuary.” So the people stopped bringing their offerings; 7 there was already enough at hand, and more than enough, to complete the work to be done.
The Tent Cloth and Coverings. 8 The various artisans who were doing the work made the tabernacle with its ten sheets woven of fine linen twined, having cherubim embroidered on them with violet, purple, and scarlet yarn. 9 The length of each sheet was twenty-eight cubits, and the width four cubits; all the sheets were the same size. 10 Five of the sheets were joined together, edge to edge; and the other five sheets likewise, edge to edge. 11 Loops of violet yarn were made along the edge of the end sheet in the first set, and the same along the edge of the end sheet in the second set. 12 Fifty loops were thus put on one inner sheet, and fifty loops on the inner sheet in the other set, with the loops directly opposite each other. 13 Then fifty clasps of gold were made, with which the sheets were joined so that the tabernacle formed one whole.
14 Sheets of goat hair were also woven as a tent over the tabernacle. Eleven such sheets were made. 15 The length of each sheet was thirty cubits and the width four cubits; all eleven sheets were the same size. 16 Five of these sheets were joined into one set, and the other six sheets into another set. 17 Fifty loops were made along the edge of the end sheet in one set, and fifty loops along the edge of the corresponding sheet in the other set. 18 Fifty bronze clasps were made with which the tent was joined so that it formed one whole. 19 A covering for the tent was made of rams’ skins dyed red and, above that, a covering of tahash skins.
The Framework. 20 Frames were made for the tabernacle, acacia-wood uprights. 21 The length of each frame was ten cubits, and the width one and a half cubits. 22 Each frame had two arms, fastening them one to another. In this way all the frames of the tabernacle were made. 23 The frames for the tabernacle were made as follows: twenty frames on the south side, 24 with forty silver pedestals under the twenty frames, two pedestals under each frame for its two arms; 25 twenty frames on the other side of the tabernacle, the north side, 26 with their forty silver pedestals, two pedestals under each frame. 27 At the rear of the tabernacle, to the west, six frames were made, 28 and two frames were made for the corners of the tabernacle, at its rear. 29 These were double at the bottom, and likewise double at the top, to the first ring. That is how both corner frames were made. 30 Thus, there were eight frames, with their sixteen silver pedestals, two pedestals under each frame. 31 Bars of acacia wood were also made, five for the frames on one side of the tabernacle, 32 five for those on the other side, and five for those at the rear, to the west. 33 The center bar, at the middle of the frames, was made to reach across from end to end. 34 The frames were plated with gold, and gold rings were made on them as holders for the bars, which were also plated with gold.
The Veil. 35 The veil was made of violet, purple, and scarlet yarn, and of fine linen twined, with cherubim embroidered on it. 36 Four gold-plated columns of acacia wood, with gold hooks, were made for it, and four silver pedestals were cast for them.

    37: The curtain for the entrance of the tent was made of violet, purple, and scarlet yarn, and of fine linen twined, woven in a variegated manner. 
    38: Its five columns, with their hooks as well as their capitals and bands, were plated with gold; their five pedestals were of bronze.
New American Bible (Revised Edition) (NABRE)
Scripture texts, prefaces, introductions, footnotes and cross references used in this work are taken from the New American Bible, revised edition © 2010, 1991, 1986, 1970 Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, DC All Rights Reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the copyright owner.

End of day 22.