Day 125:

Reading 1-Maccabees, chapters ['5', '6', '7', '8']:

  Chapter 5.

    1: When the nations round about heard that the altar had been rebuilt and the sanctuary restored as before, they were enraged. 
    2: So they decided to destroy the descendants of Jacob who were among them, and they began to kill and eradicate the people. 
    3: Then Judas attacked the Edomites at Akrabattene in Idumea, because they were blockading Israel; he dealt them a heavy blow, humbled and despoiled them. 
    4: 
    5: Victories over Hostile Neighbors. 1 When the nations round about heard that the altar had been rebuilt and the sanctuary restored as before, they were enraged. 2 So they decided to destroy the descendants of Jacob who were among them, and they began to kill and eradicate the people. 3 Then Judas attacked the Edomites[b] at Akrabattene in Idumea, because they were blockading Israel; he dealt them a heavy blow, humbled and despoiled them. 4 He also remembered the malice of the Baeanites,[c] who had become a snare and a stumbling block to the people by ambushing them along the roads. 5 He forced them to take refuge in towers, which he besieged; he put them under the ban and burned down their towers along with all who were in them. 
    6: Then he crossed over to the Ammonites, where he found a strong army and a large body of people with Timothy as their leader. 
    7: He fought many battles with them, routed them, and struck them down. 
    8: After seizing Jazer and its villages, he returned to Judea.
Liberation of Jews in Galilee and Gilead. 
    9: he Gentiles in Gilead assembled to destroy the Israelites who were in their territory; these then fled to the stronghold of Dathema. 
    10: They sent a letter to Judas and his brothers saying: “The Gentiles around us have assembled against us to destroy us, 
    11: and they are preparing to come and seize this stronghold to which we have fled. Timothy is the leader of their army. 
    12: Come at once to rescue us from them, for many of us have fallen. 
    13: All our kindred who were in the territory of the Tobiads have been killed; the Gentiles have captured their wives, their children and their goods, and they have slain there about a thousand men.”

    14: While they were reading this letter, suddenly other messengers, with garments torn, arrived from Galilee to deliver a similar message: 
    15: that “the inhabitants of Ptolemais, Tyre, and Sidon, and the whole of Gentile Galilee have joined forces to destroy us.” 
    16: When Judas and the people heard this, a great assembly convened to consider what they should do for their kindred who were in distress and being attacked by enemies.

    17: Judas said to his brother Simon: “Choose men for yourself, and go, rescue your kindred in Galilee; my brother Jonathan and I will go to Gilead.”

    18: He left Joseph, son of Zechariah, and Azariah, leader of the people, with the rest of the army in Judea to guard it. 
    19: He commanded them, “Take charge of these people, but do not join battle against the Gentiles until we return.” 
    20: Three thousand men were allotted to Simon to go into Galilee, and eight thousand men to Judas, for Gilead.

    21: Simon went into Galilee and fought many battles with the Gentiles. They were crushed before him, 
    22: and he pursued them to the very gate of Ptolemais. About three thousand of the Gentiles fell, and he gathered their spoils. 
    23: He took with him the Jews who were in Galilee and in Arbatta, with their wives and children and all that they had, and brought them to Judea with great rejoicing.

    24: Judas Maccabeus and his brother Jonathan crossed the Jordan and marched for three days through the wilderness. 
    25: There they met some Nabateans, who received them peaceably and told them all that had happened to their kindred in Gilead: 
    26: “Many of them are shut up in Bozrah, in Bosor near Alema, in Chaspho, Maked, and Carnaim”—all of these are large, fortified cities— 
    27: “and some are shut up in other cities of Gilead. Tomorrow their enemies plan to attack the strongholds and to seize and destroy all these people in one day.”

    28: Thereupon Judas suddenly changed direction with his army, marched across the wilderness to Bozrah, and captured the city. He put every male to the sword, took all their spoils, and set fire to the city. 
    29: He led his army from that place by night, and they marched toward the stronghold. 
    30: When morning came, they looked ahead and saw a countless multitude, with ladders and machines for capturing the stronghold, beginning to attack. 
    31: When Judas perceived that the struggle had begun and that the noise of the battle was resounding to heaven with trumpet blasts and loud shouting, 
    32: he said to the men of his army, “Fight for our kindred today.” 
    33: He came up behind them with three columns blowing their trumpets and crying out in prayer. 
    34: When the army of Timothy realized that it was Maccabeus, they fled before him, and he inflicted on them a great defeat. About eight thousand of their men fell that day.

    35: Then he turned toward Alema and attacked and captured it; he killed every male, took spoils, and burned it down. 
    36: From there he moved on and took Chaspho, Maked, Bosor, and the other cities of Gilead.

    37: After these events Timothy assembled another army and camped opposite Raphon, on the other side of the wadi. 
    38: Judas sent men to spy on the camp, and they reported to him: “All the Gentiles around us have rallied to him, making a very large force; 
    39: they have also hired Arabians to help them, and have camped beyond the wadi, ready to attack you.” So Judas went forward to meet them.

    40: As Judas and his army were approaching the flowing wadi, Timothy said to the officers of his army: “If he crosses over to us first, we shall not be able to resist him; he will certainly defeat us. 
    41: But if he is hesitant and camps on the other side of the river, we will cross over to him and defeat him.” 
    42: But when Judas reached the flowing wadi, he stationed the officers of the people beside it and gave them this order: “Do not allow anyone to encamp; all must go into battle.” 
    43: He was the first to cross to the attack, with all the people behind him, and all the Gentiles were crushed before them. They threw away their arms and fled to the temple enclosure at Carnaim. 
    44: But Judas’ troops captured the city and burnt the temple enclosure with all who were in it. So Carnaim was subdued, and Judas met with no more resistance.
Return to Jerusalem. 
    45: Then Judas assembled all the Israelites, great and small, who were in Gilead, with their wives and children and their goods, a very large company, to go into the land of Judah. 
    46: When they reached Ephron, a large and strongly fortified city along the way, they found it impossible to go around it on either the right or the left; they would have to march right through it. 
    47: But the people in the city shut them out and blocked up the gates with stones. 
    48: Then Judas sent them this peaceful message: “Let us cross your territory in order to reach our own; no one will harm you; we will only march through.” But they would not open to him. 
    49: So Judas ordered a proclamation to be made in the camp that everyone should take up positions where they were. 
    50: When the men of the army took up their positions, he assaulted the city all that day and night, and it was delivered into his hand. 
    51: He put every male to the sword, leveled the city, took spoils and passed through it over the slain.

    52: Then they crossed the Jordan to the great plain in front of Beth-shan; 
    53: and Judas kept gathering the stragglers and encouraging the people the whole way, until he reached the land of Judah. 
    54: They ascended Mount Zion in joy and gladness and sacrificed burnt offerings, because not one of them had fallen; they had returned in safety.
Joseph and Azariah Defeated. 
    55: In those days when Judas and Jonathan were in the land of Gilead, and Simon his brother was in Galilee opposite Ptolemais, 
    56: Joseph, son of Zechariah, and Azariah, the leaders of the army, heard about the brave deeds and the fighting that they were doing. 
    57: They said, “Let us also make a name for ourselves by going out and fighting against the Gentiles around us.” 
    58: They gave orders to those of their army who were with them, and marched against Jamnia. 
    59: But Gorgias and his men came out of the city to meet them in battle. 
    60: Joseph and Azariah were routed and were pursued to the frontiers of Judea, and about two thousand Israelites fell that day. 
    61: It was a great setback for the people, because they had not obeyed Judas and his brothers, thinking that they would do brave deeds. 
    62: But they were not of the family through whom Israel’s deliverance was given.
Victories at Hebron and Azotus. 
    63: The valiant Judas and his brothers were greatly honored in all Israel and among all the Gentiles, wherever their name was heard; 
    64: and people gathered about them and praised them.

    65: Then Judas and his brothers went out and attacked the Edomites in the land toward the south; he took Hebron and its villages, and he destroyed its strongholds and burned the towers around it. 
    66: He then set out for the land of the foreigners and passed through Marisa. 
    67: On that day some priests fell in battle who had gone out rashly to fight in their desire to do brave deeds. 
    68: Judas then turned toward Azotus in the land of the foreigners. He destroyed their altars and burned the carved images of their gods; and after plundering their cities he returned to the land of Judah.


  Chapter 6.

    1: As King Antiochus passed through the eastern provinces, he heard that in Persia there was a city, Elam, famous for its wealth in silver and gold, 
    2: and that its temple was very rich, containing gold helmets, breastplates, and weapons left there by the first king of the Greeks, Alexander, son of Philip, king of Macedon. 
    3: He went therefore and tried to capture and loot the city. But he could not do so, because his plan became known to the people of the city 
    4: who rose up in battle against him. So he fled and in great dismay withdrew from there to return to Babylon.

    5: 
    6: 1 As King Antiochus passed through the eastern provinces, he heard that in Persia there was a city, Elam, famous for its wealth in silver and gold, 2 and that its temple was very rich, containing gold helmets, breastplates, and weapons left there by the first king of the Greeks, Alexander, son of Philip, king of Macedon. 3 He went therefore and tried to capture and loot the city. But he could not do so, because his plan became known to the people of the city 4 who rose up in battle against him. So he fled and in great dismay withdrew from there to return to Babylon.
5 While he was in Persia, a messenger brought him news that the armies that had gone into the land of Judah had been routed; 6 that Lysias had gone at first with a strong army and been driven back; that the people of Judah had grown strong by reason of the arms, wealth, and abundant spoils taken from the armies they had cut down; 
    7: that they had pulled down the abomination which he had built upon the altar in Jerusalem; and that they had surrounded with high walls both the sanctuary, as it had been before, and his city of Beth-zur.

    8: When the king heard this news, he was astonished and very much shaken. Sick with grief because his designs had failed, he took to his bed. 
    9: here he remained many days, assailed by waves of grief, for he thought he was going to die. 
    10: So he called in all his Friends and said to them: “Sleep has departed from my eyes, and my heart sinks from anxiety. 
    11: I said to myself: ‘Into what tribulation have I come, and in what floods of sorrow am I now! Yet I was kindly and beloved in my rule.’ 
    12: But I now recall the evils I did in Jerusalem, when I carried away all the vessels of silver and gold that were in it, and for no cause gave orders that the inhabitants of Judah be destroyed. 
    13: I know that this is why these evils have overtaken me; and now I am dying, in bitter grief, in a foreign land.”

    14: Then he summoned Philip, one of his Friends, and put him in charge of his whole kingdom. 
    15: He gave him his diadem, his robe, and his signet ring, so that he might guide the king’s son Antiochus and bring him up to be king. 
    16: So King Antiochus died there in the one hundred and forty-ninth year. 
    17: When Lysias learned that the king was dead, he set up the king’s son Antiochus, whom he had reared as a child, to be king in his place; and he gave him the title Eupator.
Siege of the Citadel. 
    18: Those in the citadel were hemming Israel in around the sanctuary, continually trying to harm them and to strengthen the Gentiles. 
    19: And so Judas planned to destroy them, and assembled the people to besiege them. 
    20: So in the one hundred and fiftieth year they assembled and besieged the citadel, for which purpose he constructed platforms and siege engines. 
    21: But some of the besieged escaped, and some renegade Israelites joined them. 
    22: They went to the king and said: “How long will you fail to do justice and to avenge our kindred? 
    23: We agreed to serve your father and to follow his orders and obey his edicts. 
    24: And for this our own people have become our enemies; they have put to death as many of us as they could find and have seized our inheritances. 
    25: They have acted aggressively not only against us, but throughout their whole territory. 
    26: Look! Today they have besieged the citadel in Jerusalem in order to capture it, and they have fortified the sanctuary and Beth-zur. 
    27: Unless you act quickly to prevent them, they will do even worse things than these, and you will not be able to stop them.”

    28: When the king heard this he was enraged, and he called together all his Friends, the officers of his army, and the commanders of the cavalry. 
    29: Mercenary forces also came to him from other kingdoms and from the islands of the seas. 
    30: His army numbered a hundred thousand footsoldiers, twenty thousand cavalry, and thirty-two elephants trained for war. 
    31: They passed through Idumea and camped before Beth-zur. For many days they attacked it; they constructed siege engines, but the besieged made a sortie and burned these, and they fought bravely.
Battle of Beth-zechariah. 
    32: Then Judas marched away from the citadel and moved his camp to Beth-zechariah, opposite the king’s camp. 
    33: The king, rising before dawn, moved his force hastily along the road to Beth-zechariah; and the troops prepared for battle and sounded the trumpet. 
    34: They made the elephants drunk on the juice of grapes and mulberries to get them ready to fight. 
    35: The beasts were distributed along the phalanxes, each elephant having assigned to it a thousand men in coats of mail, with bronze helmets on their heads, and five hundred picked cavalry. 
    36: These accompanied the beast wherever it was; wherever it moved, they moved too and never left it. 
    37: Each elephant was outfitted with a strong wooden tower, fastened to it by a harness; each tower held three soldiers who fought from it, besides the Indian driver. 
    38: The remaining cavalry were stationed on one or the other of the two flanks of the army, to harass the enemy and to be protected by the phalanxes. 
    39: When the sun shone on the gold and bronze shields, the mountains gleamed with their brightness and blazed like flaming torches. 
    40: Part of the king’s army spread out along the heights, while some were on low ground, and they marched forward steadily in good order. 
    41: All who heard the noise of their numbers, the tramp of their marching, and the clanging of the arms, trembled; for the army was very great and strong.

    42: Judas with his army advanced to fight, and six hundred men of the king’s army fell. 
    43: Eleazar, called Avaran, saw one of the beasts covered with royal armor and bigger than any of the others, and so he thought the king was on it. 
    44: He gave up his life to save his people and win an everlasting name for himself. 
    45: He dashed courageously up to it in the middle of the phalanx, killing men right and left, so that they parted before him. 
    46: He ran under the elephant, stabbed it and killed it. The beast fell to the ground on top of him, and he died there. 
    47: But when Judas’ troops saw the strength of the royal army and the ardor of its forces, they retreated from them.
The Siege of Jerusalem. 
    48: Some of the king’s army went up to Jerusalem to attack them, and the king established camps in Judea and at Mount Zion. 
    49: He made peace with the people of Beth-zur, and they evacuated the city, because they had no food there to enable them to withstand a siege, for that was a sabbath year in the land. 
    50: The king took Beth-zur and stationed a garrison there to hold it. 
    51: For many days he besieged the sanctuary, setting up platforms and siege engines, fire-throwers, catapults and mechanical bows for shooting arrows and projectiles. 
    52: The defenders countered by setting up siege engines of their own, and kept up the fight a long time. 
    53: But there were no provisions in the storerooms, because it was the seventh year, and the reserves had been eaten up by those who had been rescued from the Gentiles and brought to Judea. 
    54: Few men remained in the sanctuary because the famine was too much for them; the rest scattered, each to his own home.
Peace Treaty. 
    55: Lysias heard that Philip, whom King Antiochus, before his death, had appointed to train his son Antiochus to be king, 
    56: had returned from Persia and Media with the army that accompanied the king, and that he was seeking to take over the government. 
    57: So he hastily decided to withdraw. He said to the king, the leaders of the army, and the soldiers: “We are growing weaker every day, our provisions are scanty, the place we are besieging is strong, and it is our duty to take care of the affairs of the kingdom. 
    58: Therefore let us now come to terms with these people and make peace with them and all their nation. 
    59: Let us grant them freedom to live according to their own laws as formerly; it was on account of their laws, which we abolished, that they became enraged and did all these things.”

    60: The proposal pleased the king and the leaders; he sent peace terms to the Jews, and they accepted. 
    61: So the king and the leaders swore an oath to them, and on these terms the Jews evacuated the fortification. 
    62: But when the king entered Mount Zion and saw how the place was fortified, he broke the oath he had sworn and gave orders to tear down the encircling wall. 
    63: Then he departed in haste and returned to Antioch, where he found Philip in control of the city. He fought against him and took the city by force.


  Chapter 7.

    1: In the one hundred and fifty-first year, Demetrius, son of Seleucus, set out from Rome, arrived with a few men at a coastal city, and began to rule there. 
    2: As he was entering the royal palace of his ancestors, the soldiers seized Antiochus and Lysias to bring them to him. 
    3: When he was informed of this, he said, “Do not show me their faces.” 
    4: So the soldiers killed them, and Demetrius assumed the royal throne.

    5: Then all the lawless men and renegades of Israel came to him. They were led by Alcimus, who desired to be high priest. 
    6: 
    7: Expedition of Bacchides and Alcimus. 1 In the one hundred and fifty-first year, Demetrius, son of Seleucus, set out from Rome, arrived with a few men at a coastal city, and began to rule there. 2 As he was entering the royal palace of his ancestors, the soldiers seized Antiochus and Lysias to bring them to him. 3 When he was informed of this, he said, “Do not show me their faces.” 4 So the soldiers killed them, and Demetrius assumed the royal throne.
5 Then all the lawless men and renegades of Israel came to him. They were led by Alcimus,[b] who desired to be high priest. 6 They made this accusation to the king against the people: “Judas and his brothers have destroyed all your friends and have driven us out of our land. 7 So now, send a man whom you trust to go and see all the destruction Judas has wrought on us and on the king’s territory, and let him punish them and all their supporters.”

    8: So the king chose Bacchides, one of the King’s Friends, who ruled the province of West-of-Euphrates, a great man in the kingdom, and faithful to the king. 
    9: e sent him and the renegade Alcimus, to whom he granted the high priesthood, with orders to take revenge on the Israelites. 
    10: They set out and, on arriving in the land of Judah with a great army, sent messengers who spoke deceitfully to Judas and his brothers in peaceful terms. 
    11: But these paid no attention to their words, seeing that they had come with a great army.

    12: A group of scribes, however, gathered about Alcimus and Bacchides to ask for a just agreement. 
    13: The Hasideans were the first among the Israelites to seek peace with them, 
    14: for they said, “A priest of the line of Aaron has come with the army, and he will not do us any wrong.” 
    15: He spoke with them peacefully and swore to them, “We will not seek to injure you or your friends.” 
    16: So they trusted him. But he arrested sixty of them and killed them in one day, according to the words that he wrote:

    17: 
“The flesh of your faithful,
    and their blood they have spilled all around about Jerusalem,
    and no one was left to bury them.”

    18: Then fear and dread of them came upon all the people, who said: “There is no truth or justice among them; they violated the agreement and the oath that they swore.”

    19: Bacchides withdrew from Jerusalem and camped in Beth-zaith. He had many of the men who deserted to him arrested and some of the people. He killed them and threw them into a great cistern. 
    20: He handed the province over to Alcimus, leaving troops to help him, while he himself returned to the king.

    21: Alcimus struggled to maintain his high priesthood, 
    22: and all those who were troubling the people gathered about him. They took possession of the land of Judah and caused great distress in Israel. 
    23: When Judas saw all the evils that Alcimus and those with him were bringing upon the Israelites, even more than the Gentiles had, 
    24: he went about all the borders of Judea and took revenge on the men who had deserted, preventing them from going out into the country. 
    25: But when Alcimus saw that Judas and his followers were gaining strength and realized that he could not resist them, he returned to the king and accused them of grave crimes.
Defeat of Nicanor. 
    26: Then the king sent Nicanor, one of his honored officers, who was a bitter enemy of Israel, with orders to destroy the people. 
    27: Nicanor came to Jerusalem with a large force and deceitfully sent to Judas and his brothers this peaceable message: 
    28: “Let there be no fight between me and you. I will come with a few men to meet you face to face in peace.”

    29: So he came to Judas, and they greeted one another peaceably. But Judas’ enemies were prepared to seize him. 
    30: When he became aware that Nicanor had come to him with deceit in mind, Judas was afraid of him and would not meet him again. 
    31: When Nicanor saw that his plan had been discovered, he went out to fight Judas near Capharsalama. 
    32: About five hundred men of Nicanor’s army fell; the rest fled to the City of David.

    33: After this, Nicanor went up to Mount Zion. Some of the priests from the sanctuary and some of the elders of the people came out to greet him peaceably and to show him the burnt offering that was being sacrificed for the king. 
    34: But he mocked and ridiculed them, defiled them, and spoke arrogantly. 
    35: In a rage he swore: “If Judas and his army are not delivered to me at once, when I return victorious I will burn this temple down.” He went away in great anger. 
    36: The priests, however, went in and stood before the altar and the sanctuary. They wept and said: 
    37: “You have chosen this house to bear your name, to be a house of prayer and supplication for your people. 
    38: Take revenge on this man and his army, and let them fall by the sword. Remember their blasphemies, and do not let them continue.”

    39: Nicanor left Jerusalem and camped at Beth-horon, where the Syrian army joined him. 
    40: But Judas camped in Adasa with three thousand men. Here Judas uttered this prayer: 
    41: “When they who were sent by the king blasphemed, your angel went out and killed a hundred and eighty-five thousand of them. 
    42: In the same way, crush this army before us today, and let the rest know that Nicanor spoke wickedly against your sanctuary; judge him according to his wickedness.”

    43: The armies met in battle on the thirteenth day of the month Adar. Nicanor’s army was crushed, and he himself was the first to fall in the battle. 
    44: When his army saw that Nicanor had fallen, they threw down their weapons and fled. 
    45: The Jews pursued them a day’s journey from Adasa to near Gazara, blowing the trumpets behind them as signals. 
    46: From all the surrounding villages of Judea people came out and outflanked them. They turned them back, and all the enemies fell by the sword; not a single one escaped.

    47: Then the Jews collected the spoils and the plunder; they cut off Nicanor’s head and his right arm, which he had lifted up so arrogantly. These they brought and displayed in the sight of Jerusalem. 
    48: The people rejoiced greatly, and observed that day as a day of much joy. 
    49: They decreed that it should be observed every year on the thirteenth of Adar. 
    50: And so for a few days the land of Judah was at rest.


  Chapter 8.

    1: Judas had heard of the reputation of the Romans. They were valiant fighters and acted amiably to all who took their side. They established a friendly alliance with all who applied to them. 
    2: He was also told of their battles and the brave deeds that they performed against the Gauls, conquering them and forcing them to pay tribute; 
    3: and what they did in Spain to get possession of the silver and gold mines there. 
    4: By planning and persistence they subjugated the whole region, although it was very remote from their own. They also subjugated the kings who had come against them from the far corners of the earth until they crushed them and inflicted on them severe defeat. The rest paid tribute to them every year. 
    5: Philip and Perseus, king of the Macedonians, and the others who opposed them in battle they overwhelmed and subjugated. 
    6: Antiochus the Great, king of Asia, who fought against them with a hundred and twenty elephants and with cavalry and chariots and a very great army, was defeated by them. 
    7: 
    8: Eulogy of the Romans. 1 Judas had heard of the reputation of the Romans. They were valiant fighters and acted amiably to all who took their side. They established a friendly alliance with all who applied to them. 2 He was also told of their battles and the brave deeds that they performed against the Gauls,[b] conquering them and forcing them to pay tribute; 3 and what they did in Spain to get possession of the silver and gold mines there. 4 By planning and persistence they subjugated the whole region, although it was very remote from their own. They also subjugated the kings who had come against them from the far corners of the earth until they crushed them and inflicted on them severe defeat. The rest paid tribute to them every year. 5 Philip[c] and Perseus, king of the Macedonians, and the others who opposed them in battle they overwhelmed and subjugated. 6 Antiochus[d] the Great, king of Asia, who fought against them with a hundred and twenty elephants and with cavalry and chariots and a very great army, was defeated by them. 7 They took him alive and obliged him and the kings who succeeded him to pay a heavy tribute, to give hostages and to cede 8 Lycia, Mysia, and Lydia[e] from among their best provinces. The Romans took these from him and gave them to King Eumenes. 
    9: f]When the Greeks planned to come and destroy them, 
    10: the Romans discovered it, and sent against the Greeks a single general who made war on them. Many were wounded and fell, and the Romans took their wives and children captive. They plundered them, took possession of their land, tore down their strongholds and reduced them to slavery even to this day. 
    11: All the other kingdoms and islands that had ever opposed them they destroyed and enslaved; with their friends, however, and those who relied on them, they maintained friendship. 
    12: They subjugated kings both near and far, and all who heard of their fame were afraid of them. 
    13: Those whom they wish to help and to make kings, they make kings; and those whom they wish, they depose; and they were greatly exalted. 
    14: Yet with all this, none of them put on a diadem or wore purple as a display of grandeur. 
    15: But they made for themselves a senate chamber, and every day three hundred and twenty men took counsel, deliberating on all that concerned the people and their well-being. 
    16: They entrust their government to one man every year, to rule over their entire land, and they all obey that one, and there is no envy or jealousy among them.
Treaty with the Romans. 
    17: So Judas chose Eupolemus, son of John, son of Accos, and Jason, son of Eleazar, and sent them to Rome to establish friendship and alliance with them. 
    18: He did this to lift the yoke from Israel, for it was obvious that the kingdom of the Greeks was subjecting them to slavery. 
    19: After making a very long journey to Rome, the envoys entered the senate chamber and spoke as follows: 
    20: “Judas, called Maccabeus, and his brothers, with the Jewish people, have sent us to you to establish alliance and peace with you, and to be enrolled among your allies and friends.” 
    21: The proposal pleased the Romans, 
    22: and this is a copy of the reply they inscribed on bronze tablets and sent to Jerusalem, to remain there with the Jews as a record of peace and alliance:

    23: “May it be well with the Romans and the Jewish nation at sea and on land forever; may sword and enemy be far from them. 
    24: But if war is first made on Rome, or any of its allies in any of their dominions, 
    25: the Jewish nation will fight along with them wholeheartedly, as the occasion shall demand; 
    26: and to those who wage war they shall not give or provide grain, weapons, money, or ships, as seems best to Rome. They shall fulfill their obligations without receiving any recompense. 
    27: In the same way, if war is made first on the Jewish nation, the Romans will fight along with them willingly, as the occasion shall demand, 
    28: and to those who attack them there shall not be given grain, weapons, money, or ships, as seems best to Rome. They shall fulfill their obligations without deception. 
    29: On these terms the Romans have made an agreement with the Jewish people. 
    30: But if both parties hereafter agree to add or take away anything, they shall do as they choose, and whatever they shall add or take away shall be valid.

    31: “Moreover, concerning the wrongs that King Demetrius is doing to them, we have written to him thus: ‘Why have you made your yoke heavy upon our friends and allies the Jews? 
    32: If they petition against you again, we will enforce justice and make war on you by sea and land.’”


End of day 125.