Day 340:

Reading Hebrews, chapters ['5', '6', '7', '8']:

  Chapter 5.

    1: Every high priest is taken from among men and made their representative before God, to offer gifts and sacrifices for sins.[b] 
    2: He is able to deal patiently with the ignorant and erring, for he himself is beset by weakness 
    3: and so, for this reason, must make sin offerings for himself as well as for the people. 
    4: 
    5: 1 Every high priest is taken from among men and made their representative before God, to offer gifts and sacrifices for sins.[b] 2 He is able to deal patiently[c] with the ignorant and erring, for he himself is beset by weakness 3 and so, for this reason, must make sin offerings for himself as well as for the people. 4 No one takes this honor upon himself but only when called by God, just as Aaron was. 5 In the same way, it was not Christ who glorified himself in becoming high priest, but rather the one who said to him:
“You are my son;
    this day I have begotten you”;

    6: just as he says in another place:
“You are a priest forever
    according to the order of Melchizedek.”

    7: In the days when he was in the flesh, he offered prayers and supplications with loud cries and tears to the one who was able to save him from death, and he was heard because of his reverence. 
    8: Son though he was, he learned obedience from what he suffered; 
    9: nd when he was made perfect, he became the source of eternal salvation for all who obey him, 
    10: declared by God high priest according to the order of Melchizedek.
IV. Jesus’ Eternal Priesthood and Eternal Sacrifice
Exhortation to Spiritual Renewal. 
    11: About this we have much to say, and it is difficult to explain, for you have become sluggish in hearing. 
    12: Although you should be teachers by this time, you need to have someone teach you again the basic elements of the utterances of God. You need milk,  not solid food. 
    13: Everyone who lives on milk lacks experience of the word of righteousness, for he is a child. 
    14: But solid food is for the mature, for those whose faculties are trained by practice to discern good and evil.


  Chapter 6.

    1: Therefore, let us leave behind the basic teaching about Christ and advance to maturity, without laying the foundation all over again: repentance from dead works and faith in God, 
    2: instruction about baptisms and laying on of hands, resurrection of the dead and eternal judgment. 
    3: And we shall do this, if only God permits. 
    4: For it is impossible in the case of those who have once been enlightened and tasted the heavenly gift and shared in the holy Spirit 
    5: 
    6: 1 Therefore, let us leave behind the basic teaching about Christ and advance to maturity, without laying the foundation all over again: repentance from dead works and faith in God, 2 instruction about baptisms and laying on of hands, resurrection of the dead and eternal judgment. 3 And we shall do this, if only God permits. 4 For it is impossible in the case of those who have once been enlightened and tasted the heavenly gift[b] and shared in the holy Spirit 5 and tasted the good word of God and the powers of the age to come,[c] 6 and then have fallen away, to bring them to repentance again, since they are recrucifying the Son of God for themselves[d] and holding him up to contempt. 
    7: Ground that has absorbed the rain falling upon it repeatedly and brings forth crops useful to those for whom it is cultivated receives a blessing from God. 
    8: But if it produces thorns and thistles, it is rejected; it will soon be cursed and finally burned.

    9: ut we are sure in your regard, beloved, of better things related to salvation, even though we speak in this way. 
    10: For God is not unjust so as to overlook your work and the love you have demonstrated for his name by having served and continuing to serve the holy ones. 
    11: We earnestly desire each of you to demonstrate the same eagerness for the fulfillment of hope until the end, 
    12: so that you may not become sluggish, but imitators of those who, through faith and patience, are inheriting the promises.
God’s Promise Immutable. 
    13: When God made the promise to Abraham, since he had no one greater by whom to swear, “he swore by himself,” 
    14: and said, “I will indeed bless you and multiply” you. 
    15: And so, after patient waiting, he obtained the promise. 
    16: Human beings swear by someone greater than themselves; for them an oath serves as a guarantee and puts an end to all argument. 
    17: So when God wanted to give the heirs of his promise an even clearer demonstration of the immutability of his purpose, he intervened with an oath, 
    18: so that by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we who have taken refuge might be strongly encouraged to hold fast to the hope that lies before us. 
    19: This we have as an anchor of the soul, sure and firm, which reaches into the interior behind the veil, 
    20: where Jesus has entered on our behalf as forerunner, becoming high priest forever according to the order of Melchizedek.


  Chapter 7.

    1: This “Melchizedek, king of Salem and priest of God Most High,”[b] “met Abraham as he returned from his defeat of the kings” and “blessed him.” 
    2: And Abraham apportioned to him “a tenth of everything.” His name first means righteous king, and he was also “king of Salem,” that is, king of peace. 
    3: Without father, mother, or ancestry, without beginning of days or end of life, thus made to resemble the Son of God, he remains a priest forever.

    4: See how great he is to whom the patriarch “Abraham [indeed] gave a tenth” of his spoils. 
    5: The descendants of Levi who receive the office of priesthood have a commandment according to the law to exact tithes from the people, that is, from their brothers, although they also have come from the loins of Abraham. 
    6: 
    7: Melchizedek, a Type of Christ. 1 This “Melchizedek, king of Salem and priest of God Most High,”[b] “met Abraham as he returned from his defeat of the kings” and “blessed him.” 2 [c]And Abraham apportioned to him “a tenth of everything.” His name first means righteous king, and he was also “king of Salem,” that is, king of peace. 3 Without father, mother, or ancestry, without beginning of days or end of life,[d] thus made to resemble the Son of God, he remains a priest forever.
4 [e]See how great he is to whom the patriarch “Abraham [indeed] gave a tenth” of his spoils. 5 The descendants of Levi who receive the office of priesthood have a commandment according to the law to exact tithes from the people, that is, from their brothers, although they also have come from the loins of Abraham. 6 But he who was not of their ancestry received tithes from Abraham and blessed him who had received the promises. 7 Unquestionably, a lesser person is blessed by a greater.[f] 
    8: In the one case, mortal men receive tithes; in the other, a man of whom it is testified that he lives on. 
    9: ne might even say that Levi himself, who receives tithes, was tithed through Abraham, 
    10: for he was still in his father’s loins when Melchizedek met him.

    11: If, then, perfection came through the levitical priesthood, on the basis of which the people received the law, what need would there still have been for another priest to arise according to the order of Melchizedek, and not reckoned according to the order of Aaron? 
    12: When there is a change of priesthood, there is necessarily a change of law as well. 
    13: Now he of whom these things are said belonged to a different tribe, of which no member ever officiated at the altar. 
    14: It is clear that our Lord arose from Judah, and in regard to that tribe Moses said nothing about priests. 
    15: It is even more obvious if another priest is raised up after the likeness of Melchizedek, 
    16: who has become so, not by a law expressed in a commandment concerning physical descent but by the power of a life that cannot be destroyed. 
    17: For it is testified:
“You are a priest forever
    according to the order of Melchizedek.”

    18: On the one hand, a former commandment is annulled because of its weakness and uselessness, 
    19: for the law brought nothing to perfection; on the other hand, a better hope is introduced, through which we draw near to God. 
    20: And to the degree that this happened not without the taking of an oath[o]—for others became priests without an oath, 
    21: but he with an oath, through the one who said to him:
“The Lord has sworn, and he will not repent:
    ‘You are a priest forever’”—

    22: to that same degree has Jesus  become the guarantee of an [even] better covenant.[p] 
    23: Those priests were many because they were prevented by death from remaining in office, 
    24: but he, because he remains forever, has a priesthood that does not pass away. 
    25: Therefore, he is always able to save those who approach God through him, since he lives forever to make intercession for them.

    26: It was fitting that we should have such a high priest: holy, innocent, undefiled, separated from sinners, higher than the heavens.[s] 
    27: He has no need, as did the high priests, to offer sacrifice day after day, first for his own sins and then for those of the people; he did that once for all when he offered himself. 
    28: For the law appoints men subject to weakness to be high priests, but the word of the oath, which was taken after the law, appoints a son, who has been made perfect forever.


  Chapter 8.

    1: The main point of what has been said is this: we have such a high priest, who has taken his seat at the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in heaven, 
    2: a minister of the sanctuary and of the true tabernacle that the Lord, not man, set up. 
    3: Now every high priest is appointed to offer gifts and sacrifices; thus the necessity for this one also to have something to offer. 
    4: If then he were on earth, he would not be a priest, since there are those who offer gifts according to the law. 
    5: They worship in a copy and shadow of the heavenly sanctuary, as Moses was warned when he was about to erect the tabernacle. For he says, “See that you make everything according to the pattern shown you on the mountain.” 
    6: Now he has obtained so much more excellent a ministry as he is mediator of a better covenant, enacted on better promises.
Old and New Covenants. 
    7: 
    8: Heavenly Priesthood of Jesus. 1 The main point of what has been said is this: we have such a high priest, who has taken his seat at the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in heaven, 2 a minister of the sanctuary[b] and of the true tabernacle that the Lord, not man, set up. 3 Now every high priest is appointed to offer gifts and sacrifices; thus the necessity for this one also to have something to offer. 4 If then he were on earth, he would not be a priest, since there are those who offer gifts according to the law. 5 They worship in a copy and shadow of the heavenly sanctuary, as Moses was warned when he was about to erect the tabernacle. For he says, “See that you make everything according to the pattern shown you on the mountain.” 6 Now he has obtained so much more excellent a ministry as he is mediator of a better covenant, enacted on better promises.
Old and New Covenants.[c] 7 For if that first covenant had been faultless, no place would have been sought for a second one. 8 But he finds fault with them and says:[d]
“Behold, the days are coming, says the Lord,
    when I will conclude a new covenant with the house of Israel and the house of Judah.

    9: It will not be like the covenant I made with their fathers
    the day I took them by the hand to lead them forth from the land of Egypt;
for they did not stand by my covenant
    and I ignored them, says the Lord.

    10: 
But this is the covenant I will establish with the house of Israel
    after those days, says the Lord:
I will put my laws in their minds
    and I will write them upon their hearts.
I will be their God,
    and they shall be my people.

    11: 
And they shall not teach, each one his fellow citizen
    and kinsman, saying, ‘Know the Lord,’
for all shall know me,
    from least to greatest.

    12: 
For I will forgive their evildoing
    and remember their sins no more.”

    13: When he speaks of a “new” covenant, he declares the first one obsolete. And what has become obsolete and has grown old is close to disappearing.


End of day 340.