Day 46:

Reading Deuteronomy, chapters ['25', '26', '27', '28']:

  Chapter 25.

    1: 
    2: 
Limits on Punishments. 1 When there is a dispute and the parties draw near for judgment, and a decision is given, declaring one party in the right and the other in the wrong, 2 if the one in the wrong deserves whipping, the judge shall have him lie down and in the presence of the judge receive the number of lashes the crime warrants. 
    3: Forty lashes may be given, but no more; or else, if more lashes are added to these many blows, your brother will be degraded in your sight.
Treatment of Oxen.[b] 
    4: 
    5: Limits on Punishments. 1 When there is a dispute and the parties draw near for judgment, and a decision is given, declaring one party in the right and the other in the wrong, 2 if the one in the wrong deserves whipping, the judge shall have him lie down and in the presence of the judge receive the number of lashes the crime warrants. 3 Forty lashes may be given, but no more; or else, if more lashes are added to these many blows, your brother will be degraded in your sight.
Treatment of Oxen.[b] 4 You shall not muzzle an ox when it treads out grain.
Levirate Marriage. 5 When brothers live together[c] and one of them dies without a son, the widow of the deceased shall not marry anyone outside the family; but her husband’s brother shall come to her, marrying her and performing the duty of a brother-in-law. 
    6: The firstborn son she bears shall continue the name of the deceased brother, that his name may not be blotted out from Israel. 
    7: But if a man does not want to marry his brother’s wife, she shall go up to the elders at the gate and say, “My brother-in-law refuses to perpetuate his brother’s name in Israel and does not intend to perform his duty toward me.” 
    8: Thereupon the elders of his city shall summon him and speak to him. If he persists in saying, “I do not want to marry her,” 
    9: d]his sister-in-law, in the presence of the elders, shall go up to him and strip his sandal from his foot and spit in his face, declaring, “This is how one should be treated who will not build up his brother’s family!” 
    10: And his name shall be called in Israel, “the house of the man stripped of his sandal.”
Various Precepts. 
    11: When two men are fighting and the wife of one intervenes to save her husband from the blows of his opponent, if she stretches out her hand and seizes the latter by his genitals, 
    12: you shall chop off her hand; show no pity.

    13: You shall not keep two differing weights in your bag, one heavy and the other light; 
    14: nor shall you keep two different ephahs in your house, one large and the other small. 
    15: But use a full and just weight, a full and just ephah, so that you may have a long life on the land the Lord, your God, is giving you. 
    16: For everyone who does these things, everyone who does what is dishonest, is an abomination to the Lord, your God.

    17: Bear in mind what Amalek did to you on the journey after you left Egypt, 
    18: how he surprised you along the way, weak and weary as you were, and struck down at the rear all those who lagged behind; he did not fear God. 
    19: Therefore, when the Lord, your God, gives you rest from all your enemies round about in the land which the Lord, your God, is giving you to possess as a heritage, you shall blot out the memory of Amalek from under the heavens. Do not forget!


  Chapter 26.

    1: 
    2: 
Thanksgiving for the Harvest. 1 When you have come into the land which the Lord, your God, is giving you as a heritage, and have taken possession and settled in it, 2 you shall take some first fruits of the various products of the soil which you harvest from the land the Lord, your God, is giving you; put them in a basket and go to the place which the Lord, your God, will choose as the dwelling place for his name. 
    3: There you shall go to the priest in office at that time and say to him, “Today I acknowledge to the Lord, my God, that I have indeed come into the land which the Lord swore to our ancestors to give us.” 
    4: The priest shall then take the basket from your hands and set it in front of the altar of the Lord, your God. 
    5: 
    6: Thanksgiving for the Harvest. 1 When you have come into the land which the Lord, your God, is giving you as a heritage, and have taken possession and settled in it, 2 you shall take some first fruits of the various products of the soil which you harvest from the land the Lord, your God, is giving you; put them in a basket and go to the place which the Lord, your God, will choose as the dwelling place for his name. 3 There you shall go to the priest in office at that time and say to him, “Today I acknowledge to the Lord, my God, that I have indeed come into the land which the Lord swore to our ancestors to give us.” 4 The priest shall then take the basket from your hands and set it in front of the altar of the Lord, your God. 5 Then you shall declare in the presence of the Lord, your God, “My father was a refugee Aramean who went down to Egypt with a small household and lived there as a resident alien. But there he became a nation great, strong and numerous. 6 When the Egyptians maltreated and oppressed us, imposing harsh servitude upon us, 
    7: we cried to the Lord, the God of our ancestors, and the Lord heard our cry and saw our affliction, our toil and our oppression. 
    8: Then the Lord brought us out of Egypt with a strong hand and outstretched arm, with terrifying power, with signs and wonders, 
    9: nd brought us to this place, and gave us this land, a land flowing with milk and honey. 
    10: Now, therefore, I have brought the first fruits of the products of the soil which you, Lord, have given me.” You shall set them before the Lord, your God, and you shall bow down before the Lord, your God. 
    11: Then you and your household, together with the Levite and the resident aliens who live among you, shall celebrate with all these good things which the Lord, your God, has given you.
Declaration Concerning Tithes. 
    12: When you have finished setting aside all the tithes of your produce in the third year, the year of the tithes, and have given them to the Levite, the resident alien, the orphan and the widow, that they may eat and be satisfied in your own communities, 
    13: you shall declare before the Lord, your God, “I have purged my house of the sacred portion and I have given it to the Levite, the resident alien, the orphan and the widow, just as you have commanded me. I have not transgressed any of your commandments, nor forgotten any. 
    14: I have not eaten any of the tithe while in mourning; I have not brought any of it while unclean; I have not offered any of it to the dead. I have thus obeyed the voice of the Lord, my God, and done just as you have commanded me. 
    15: Look down, then, from heaven, your holy abode, and bless your people Israel and the fields you have given us, as you promised on oath to our ancestors, a land flowing with milk and honey.”
The Covenant. 
    16: This day the Lord, your God, is commanding you to observe these statutes and ordinances. Be careful, then, to observe them with your whole heart and with your whole being. 
    17: Today you have accepted the Lord’s agreement: he will be your God, and you will walk in his ways, observe his statutes, commandments, and ordinances, and obey his voice. 
    18: And today the Lord has accepted your agreement: you will be a people specially his own, as he promised you, you will keep all his commandments, 
    19: and he will set you high in praise and renown and glory above all nations he has made, and you will be a people holy to the Lord, your God, as he promised.


  Chapter 27.

    1: 
    2: 
The Altar on Mount Ebal. 1 Then Moses, with the elders of Israel, commanded the people, saying: Keep this whole commandment which I give you today. 2 On the day you cross the Jordan into the land which the Lord, your God, is giving you, set up some large stones and coat them with plaster. 
    3: Write on them, at the time you cross, all the words of this law, so that you may enter the land which the Lord, your God, is giving you, a land flowing with milk and honey, just as the Lord, the God of your ancestors, promised you. 
    4: When you cross the Jordan, on Mount Ebal you shall set up these stones concerning which I command you today, and coat them with plaster, 
    5: and you shall build there an altar to the Lord, your God, an altar made of stones that no iron tool has touched. 
    6: 
    7: The Altar on Mount Ebal. 1 Then Moses, with the elders of Israel, commanded the people, saying: Keep this whole commandment which I give you today. 2 On the day you cross the Jordan into the land which the Lord, your God, is giving you, set up some large stones and coat them with plaster. 3 Write on them, at the time you cross, all the words of this law, so that you may enter the land which the Lord, your God, is giving you, a land flowing with milk and honey, just as the Lord, the God of your ancestors, promised you. 4 When you cross the Jordan, on Mount Ebal you shall set up these stones concerning which I command you today, and coat them with plaster, 5 and you shall build there an altar to the Lord, your God, an altar made of stones that no iron tool has touched. 6 You shall build this altar of the Lord, your God, with unhewn stones, and shall offer on it burnt offerings to the Lord, your God. 7 You shall also offer communion sacrifices and eat them there, rejoicing in the presence of the Lord, your God. 
    8: On the stones you shall inscribe all the words of this law very clearly.

    9: oses, with the levitical priests, then said to all Israel: Be silent, Israel, and listen! This day you have become the people of the Lord, your God. 
    10: You shall obey the voice of the Lord, your God, and keep his commandments and statutes which I am giving you today.
Preparation for Blessings and Curses. 
    11: That same day Moses commanded the people, saying: 
    12: When you cross the Jordan, these shall stand on Mount Gerizim to bless the people: Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, Joseph and Benjamin. 
    13: And these shall stand on Mount Ebal for the curse: Reuben, Gad, Asher, Zebulun, Dan and Naphtali.
The Twelve Curses. 
    14: The Levites shall proclaim in a loud voice to all the Israelites: 
    15: “Cursed be anyone who makes a carved or molten idol, an abomination to the Lord, the work of a craftsman’s hands, and sets it up in secret!” And all the people shall answer, “Amen!”

    16: “Cursed be anyone who dishonors father or mother!” And all the people shall answer, “Amen!”

    17: “Cursed be anyone who moves a neighbor’s boundary markers!” And all the people shall answer, “Amen!”

    18: “Cursed be anyone who misleads the blind on their way!” And all the people shall answer, “Amen!”

    19: “Cursed be anyone who deprives the resident alien, the orphan or the widow of justice!” And all the people shall answer, “Amen!”

    20: “Cursed be anyone who has relations with his father’s wife, for he dishonors his father’s bed!” And all the people shall answer, “Amen!”

    21: “Cursed be anyone who has relations with any animal!” And all the people shall answer, “Amen!”

    22: “Cursed be anyone who has relations with his sister, whether his father’s daughter or his mother’s daughter!” And all the people shall answer, “Amen!”

    23: “Cursed be anyone who has relations with his mother-in-law!” And all the people shall answer, “Amen!”

    24: “Cursed be anyone who strikes down a neighbor in secret!” And all the people shall answer, “Amen!”

    25: “Cursed be anyone who accepts payment to kill an innocent person!” And all the people shall answer, “Amen!”

    26: 
    27: The Altar on Mount Ebal. 1 Then Moses, with the elders of Israel, commanded the people, saying: Keep this whole commandment which I give you today. 2 On the day you cross the Jordan into the land which the Lord, your God, is giving you, set up some large stones and coat them with plaster. 3 Write on them, at the time you cross, all the words of this law, so that you may enter the land which the Lord, your God, is giving you, a land flowing with milk and honey, just as the Lord, the God of your ancestors, promised you. 4 When you cross the Jordan, on Mount Ebal you shall set up these stones concerning which I command you today, and coat them with plaster, 5 and you shall build there an altar to the Lord, your God, an altar made of stones that no iron tool has touched. 6 You shall build this altar of the Lord, your God, with unhewn stones, and shall offer on it burnt offerings to the Lord, your God. 7 You shall also offer communion sacrifices and eat them there, rejoicing in the presence of the Lord, your God. 8 On the stones you shall inscribe all the words of this law very clearly.
9 Moses, with the levitical priests, then said to all Israel: Be silent, Israel, and listen! This day you have become the people of the Lord, your God. 10 You shall obey the voice of the Lord, your God, and keep his commandments and statutes which I am giving you today.
Preparation for Blessings and Curses. 11 That same day Moses commanded the people, saying: 12 When you cross the Jordan, these shall stand on Mount Gerizim to bless the people: Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, Joseph and Benjamin. 13 And these shall stand on Mount Ebal for the curse: Reuben, Gad, Asher, Zebulun, Dan and Naphtali.
The Twelve Curses. 14 The Levites shall proclaim in a loud voice to all the Israelites: 15 [b]“Cursed be anyone who makes a carved or molten idol, an abomination to the Lord, the work of a craftsman’s hands, and sets it up in secret!” And all the people shall answer, “Amen!”
16 “Cursed be anyone who dishonors father or mother!” And all the people shall answer, “Amen!”
17 “Cursed be anyone who moves a neighbor’s boundary markers!” And all the people shall answer, “Amen!”
18 “Cursed be anyone who misleads the blind on their way!” And all the people shall answer, “Amen!”
19 “Cursed be anyone who deprives the resident alien, the orphan or the widow of justice!” And all the people shall answer, “Amen!”
20 “Cursed be anyone who has relations with his father’s wife, for he dishonors his father’s bed!” And all the people shall answer, “Amen!”
21 “Cursed be anyone who has relations with any animal!” And all the people shall answer, “Amen!”
22 “Cursed be anyone who has relations with his sister, whether his father’s daughter or his mother’s daughter!” And all the people shall answer, “Amen!”
23 “Cursed be anyone who has relations with his mother-in-law!” And all the people shall answer, “Amen!”
24 “Cursed be anyone who strikes down a neighbor in secret!” And all the people shall answer, “Amen!”
25 “Cursed be anyone who accepts payment to kill an innocent person!” And all the people shall answer, “Amen!”
26 “Cursed be anyone whose actions do not uphold the words of this law!” And all the people shall answer, “Amen!”


  Chapter 28.

    1: 
    2: 
Blessings for Obedience. 1 Now, if you diligently obey the voice of the Lord, your God, carefully observing all his commandments which I give you today, the Lord, your God, will set you high above all the nations of the earth. 2 All these blessings will come upon you and overwhelm you when you obey the voice of the Lord, your God:

    3: 
May you be blessed in the city,
    and blessed in the country!

    4: 
Blessed be the fruit of your womb,
    the produce of your soil and the offspring of your livestock,
    the issue of your herds and the young of your flocks!

    5: 
Blessed be your grain basket and your kneading bowl!

    6: 
May you be blessed in your coming in,
    and blessed in your going out!
Victory and Prosperity. 
    7: 
    8: Blessings for Obedience. 1 Now, if you diligently obey the voice of the Lord, your God, carefully observing all his commandments which I give you today, the Lord, your God, will set you high above all the nations of the earth. 2 All these blessings will come upon you and overwhelm you when you obey the voice of the Lord, your God:
3 
May you be blessed in the city,
    and blessed in the country!
4 
Blessed be the fruit of your womb,
    the produce of your soil and the offspring of your livestock,
    the issue of your herds and the young of your flocks!
5 
Blessed be your grain basket and your kneading bowl!
6 
May you be blessed in your coming in,
    and blessed in your going out!
Victory and Prosperity. 7 The Lord will beat down before you the enemies that rise up against you; they will come out against you from one direction, and flee before you in seven.[b] 8 The Lord will affirm the blessing upon you, on your barns and on all your undertakings; he will bless you in the land that the Lord, your God, is giving you. 
    9: he Lord will establish you as a holy people, as he swore to you, if you keep the commandments of the Lord, your God, and walk in his ways. 
    10: All the peoples of the earth will see that the name of the Lord is proclaimed over you, and they will be afraid of you. 
    11: The Lord will generously increase the fruit of your womb, the offspring of your livestock, and the produce of your soil, upon the land which the Lord swore to your ancestors he would give you. 
    12: The Lord will open up for you his rich storehouse, the heavens, to give your land rain in due season and to bless all the works of your hands. You will lend to many nations but borrow from none. 
    13: The Lord will make you the head not the tail, the top not the bottom, if you obey the commandments of the Lord, your God, which I am giving you today, observing them carefully, 
    14: not turning aside, either to the right or to the left, from any of the words which I am giving you today, following other gods and serving them.
Curses for Disobedience. 
    15: But if you do not obey the voice of the Lord, your God, carefully observing all his commandments and statutes which I give you today, all these curses shall come upon you and overwhelm you:

    16: May you be cursed in the city, and cursed in the country! 
    17: Cursed be your grain basket and your kneading bowl! 
    18: Cursed be the fruit of your womb, the produce of your soil and the offspring of your livestock, the issue of your herds and the young of your flocks! 
    19: May you be cursed in your coming in, and cursed in your going out!
Sickness and Defeat. 
    20: The Lord will send on you a curse, panic, and frustration in everything you set your hand to, until you are speedily destroyed and perish for the evil you have done in forsaking me. 
    21: The Lord will make disease cling to you until he has made an end of you from the land you are entering to possess. 
    22: The Lord will strike you with consumption, fever, and inflammation, with fiery heat and drought, with blight and mildew, that will pursue you until you perish. 
    23: The heavens over your heads will be like bronze and the earth under your feet like iron. 
    24: For rain the Lord will give your land powdery dust, which will come down upon you from the heavens until you are destroyed. 
    25: The Lord will let you be beaten down before your enemies; though you advance against them from one direction, you will flee before them in seven, so that you will become an object of horror to all the kingdoms of the earth. 
    26: Your corpses will become food for all the birds of the air and for the beasts of the field, with no one to frighten them off. 
    27: 
    28: Blessings for Obedience. 1 Now, if you diligently obey the voice of the Lord, your God, carefully observing all his commandments which I give you today, the Lord, your God, will set you high above all the nations of the earth. 2 All these blessings will come upon you and overwhelm you when you obey the voice of the Lord, your God:
3 
May you be blessed in the city,
    and blessed in the country!
4 
Blessed be the fruit of your womb,
    the produce of your soil and the offspring of your livestock,
    the issue of your herds and the young of your flocks!
5 
Blessed be your grain basket and your kneading bowl!
6 
May you be blessed in your coming in,
    and blessed in your going out!
Victory and Prosperity. 7 The Lord will beat down before you the enemies that rise up against you; they will come out against you from one direction, and flee before you in seven.[b] 8 The Lord will affirm the blessing upon you, on your barns and on all your undertakings; he will bless you in the land that the Lord, your God, is giving you. 9 The Lord will establish you as a holy people, as he swore to you, if you keep the commandments of the Lord, your God, and walk in his ways. 10 All the peoples of the earth will see that the name of the Lord is proclaimed over you,[c] and they will be afraid of you. 11 The Lord will generously increase the fruit of your womb, the offspring of your livestock, and the produce of your soil, upon the land which the Lord swore to your ancestors he would give you. 12 The Lord will open up for you his rich storehouse, the heavens, to give your land rain in due season and to bless all the works of your hands. You will lend to many nations but borrow from none. 13 The Lord will make you the head not the tail, the top not the bottom, if you obey the commandments of the Lord, your God, which I am giving you today, observing them carefully, 14 not turning aside, either to the right or to the left, from any of the words which I am giving you today, following other gods and serving them.
Curses for Disobedience. 15 But if you do not obey the voice of the Lord, your God, carefully observing all his commandments and statutes which I give you today, all these curses shall come upon you and overwhelm you:
16 May you be cursed in the city, and cursed in the country! 17 Cursed be your grain basket and your kneading bowl! 18 Cursed be the fruit of your womb, the produce of your soil and the offspring of your livestock, the issue of your herds and the young of your flocks! 19 May you be cursed in your coming in, and cursed in your going out!
Sickness and Defeat. 20 The Lord will send on you a curse, panic, and frustration in everything you set your hand to, until you are speedily destroyed and perish for the evil you have done in forsaking me. 21 The Lord will make disease cling to you until he has made an end of you from the land you are entering to possess. 22 The Lord will strike you with consumption, fever, and inflammation, with fiery heat and drought, with blight and mildew, that will pursue you until you perish. 23 The heavens over your heads will be like bronze and the earth under your feet like iron. 24 For rain the Lord will give your land powdery dust, which will come down upon you from the heavens until you are destroyed. 25 The Lord will let you be beaten down before your enemies; though you advance against them from one direction, you will flee before them in seven,[d] so that you will become an object of horror to all the kingdoms of the earth. 26 Your corpses will become food for all the birds of the air and for the beasts of the field, with no one to frighten them off. 27 The Lord will strike you with Egyptian boils and with tumors, skin diseases and the itch, from none of which you can be cured. 28 And the Lord will strike you with madness, blindness and panic, 
    29: so that even at midday you will grope in the dark as though blind, unable to find your way.
Despoilment. You will be oppressed and robbed continually, with no one to come to your aid. 
    30: Though you betroth a wife, another will have her. Though you build a house, you will not live in it. Though you plant a vineyard, you will not pluck its fruits. 
    31: Your ox will be slaughtered before your eyes, but you will not eat its flesh. Your donkey will be stolen in your presence, but you will never get it back. Your flocks will be given to your enemies, with no one to come to your aid. 
    32: Your sons and daughters will be given to another people while you strain your eyes looking for them every day, having no power to do anything. 
    33: A people you do not know will consume the fruit of your soil and of all your labor, and you will be thoroughly oppressed and continually crushed, 
    34: until you are driven mad by what your eyes must look upon. 
    35: The Lord will strike you with malignant boils of which you cannot be cured, on your knees and legs, and from the soles of your feet to the crown of your head.
Exile. 
    36: The Lord will bring you, and your king whom you have set over you, to a nation which you and your ancestors have not known, and there you will serve other gods, of wood and stone, 
    37: and you will be a horror, a byword, a taunt among all the peoples to which the Lord will drive you.
Fruitless Labors. 
    38: Though you take out seed to your field, you will harvest but little, for the locusts will devour it. 
    39: Though you plant and cultivate vineyards, you will not drink or store up the wine, for the worms will eat them. 
    40: Though you have olive trees throughout your country, you will have no oil for ointment, for your olives will drop off. 
    41: Though you beget sons and daughters, they will not remain with you, for they will go into captivity. 
    42: Buzzing insects will take possession of all your trees and the crops of your soil. 
    43: The resident aliens among you will rise above you higher and higher, while you sink lower and lower. 
    44: They will lend to you, not you to them. They will become the head, you the tail.

    45: All these curses will come upon you, pursuing you and overwhelming you, until you are destroyed, because you would not obey the voice of the Lord, your God, by keeping his commandments and statutes which he gave you. 
    46: They will be a sign and a wonder for you and your descendants for all time. 
    47: Since you would not serve the Lord, your God, with heartfelt joy for abundance of every kind, 
    48: in hunger and thirst, in nakedness and utter want, you will serve the enemies whom the Lord will send against you. He will put an iron yoke on your neck, until he destroys you.
Invasion and Siege. 
    49: The Lord will raise up against you a nation from afar, from the end of the earth, that swoops down like an eagle, a nation whose language you do not understand, 
    50: a nation of fierce appearance, that shows neither respect for the aged nor mercy for the young. 
    51: They will consume the offspring of your livestock and the produce of your soil, until you are destroyed; they will leave you no grain or wine or oil, no issue of herd, no young of flock, until they have brought about your ruin. 
    52: They will besiege you in each of your communities, until the great, fortified walls, in which you trust, come tumbling down all over your land. They will besiege you in every community throughout the land which the Lord, your God, has given you, 
    53: and because of the siege and the distress to which your enemy subjects you, you will eat the fruit of your womb, the flesh of your own sons and daughters whom the Lord, your God, has given you. 
    54: The most refined and fastidious man among you will begrudge his brother and his beloved wife and his surviving children, 
    55: any share in the flesh of his children that he himself is using for food because nothing else is left him—such the siege and distress to which your enemy will subject you in all your communities. 
    56: The most fastidious woman among you, who would not venture to set the sole of her foot on the ground, so refined and fastidious is she, will begrudge her beloved husband and her son and daughter 
    57: the afterbirth that issues from her womb and the infants she brings forth because she secretly eats them for want of anything else—such the siege and distress to which your enemy will subject you in your communities.
Plagues. 
    58: If you are not careful to observe all the words of this law which is written in this book, and to fear this glorious and awesome name, the Lord, your God, 
    59: the Lord will bring upon you and your descendants wondrous calamities, severe and constant calamities, and malignant and constant sicknesses. 
    60: He will bring back upon you all the diseases of Egypt which you dread, and they will cling to you. 
    61: Even any sickness or calamity not written in this book of the law, that too the Lord will bring upon you until you are destroyed. 
    62: You who were numerous as the stars of the heavens will be left few in number, because you would not obey the voice of the Lord, your God.
Exile. 
    63: Just as the Lord once took delight in making you prosper and grow, so will the Lord now take delight in ruining and destroying you, and you will be plucked out of the land you are now entering to possess. 
    64: The Lord will scatter you among all the peoples from one end of the earth to the other, and there you will serve other gods, of wood and stone, which you and your ancestors have not known. 
    65: Among these nations you will find no rest, not even a resting place for the sole of your foot, for there the Lord will give you an anguished heart and wearied eyes and a trembling spirit. 
    66: Your life will hang in suspense and you will stand in dread both day and night, never sure of your life. 
    67: In the morning you will say, “Would that it were evening!” and in the evening you will say, “Would that it were morning!” because of the dread that your heart must feel and the sight that your eyes must see. 
    68: The Lord will send you back in ships to Egypt, by a route which I told you that you would never see again; and there you will offer yourselves for sale to your enemies as male and female slaves, but there will be no buyer.

    69: These are the words of the covenant which the Lord commanded Moses to make with the Israelites in the land of Moab, in addition to the covenant he made with them at Horeb.


End of day 46.