Day 76:

Reading 1-Kings, chapters ['1', '2', '3', '4']:

  Chapter 1.

    1: David’s Old Age. 1 When King David was old and advanced in years, though they covered him with blankets he could not get warm. 
    2: His servants therefore said to him, “Let a young virgin be sought to attend my lord the king, and to nurse him. If she sleeps with you, my lord the king will be warm.” 
    3: So they sought for a beautiful girl throughout the territory of Israel, and found Abishag the Shunamite. So they brought her to the king. 
    4: The girl was very beautiful indeed, and she nursed the king and took care of him. But the king did not have relations with her.
Adonijah’s Ambition. 
    5: Adonijah, son of Haggith, boasted, “I shall be king!” and he provided himself with chariots, horses, and a retinue of fifty to go before him. 
    6: Yet his father would never antagonize him by asking, “Why are you doing this?” Adonijah was also very handsome, and next in age to Absalom by the same mother. 
    7: He consulted with Joab, son of Zeruiah, and with Abiathar the priest, and they became Adonijah’s supporters. 
    8: However, Zadok the priest, Benaiah, son of Jehoiada, Nathan the prophet, Shimei and Rei, and David’s warriors did not support Adonijah.

    9: donijah slaughtered sheep, oxen, and fatlings at the stone Zoheleth near En-rogel and invited all his brothers, the king’s sons, and all the royal officials of Judah; 
    10: but he did not invite Nathan the prophet, or Benaiah, or the warriors, or Solomon his brother.
Solomon Proclaimed King. 
    11: Then Nathan said to Bathsheba, Solomon’s mother: “Have you not heard that Adonijah, son of Haggith, has become king, and our lord David does not know? 
    12: Come now, let me advise you so that you may save your life and the life of your son Solomon. 
    13: Go, visit King David, and say to him, ‘Did you not, my lord king, swear to your handmaid: Your son Solomon shall be king after me; it is he who shall sit upon my throne? Why, then, has Adonijah become king?’ 
    14: And while you are still there speaking to the king, I will come in after you and confirm your words.”

    15: So Bathsheba visited the king in his room. The king was very old, and Abishag the Shunamite was caring for the king. 
    16: Bathsheba bowed in homage to the king. The king said to her, “What do you wish?” 
    17: She answered him: “My lord, you swore to your servant by the Lord, your God, ‘Solomon your son will be king after me; it is he who shall sit upon my throne.’ 
    18: But now Adonijah has become king, and you, my lord king, do not know it. 
    19: He has sacrificed bulls, fatlings, and sheep in great numbers; he has invited all the king’s sons, Abiathar the priest, and Joab, the commander of the army, but not your servant Solomon. 
    20: Now, my lord king, all Israel is looking to you to declare to them who is to sit upon the throne of my lord the king after him. 
    21: If this is not done, when my lord the king rests with his ancestors, I and my son Solomon will be considered criminals.”

    22: While she was still speaking to the king, Nathan the prophet came in. 
    23: They told the king, “Nathan the prophet is here.” He entered the king’s presence and did him homage, bowing to the floor. 
    24: Then Nathan said: “My lord king, did you say, ‘Adonijah shall be king after me and shall sit upon my throne’? 
    25: For today he went down and sacrificed bulls, fatlings, and sheep in great numbers; he invited all the king’s sons, the commanders of the army, and Abiathar the priest, and even now they are eating and drinking in his company and saying, ‘Long live King Adonijah!’ 
    26: But me, your servant, he did not invite; nor Zadok the priest, nor Benaiah, son of Jehoiada, nor your servant Solomon. 
    27: If this was done by order of my lord the king, you did not tell me, your servant, who is to sit upon the throne of my lord the king after him.”

    28: King David answered, “Call Bathsheba here.” When she entered the king’s presence and stood before him, 
    29: the king swore, “As the Lord lives, who has redeemed my life from all distress, 
    30: this very day I will fulfill the oath I swore to you by the Lord, the God of Israel, ‘Your son Solomon shall be king after me and shall sit upon my throne in my place.’” 
    31: Bowing to the floor in homage to the king, Bathsheba said, “May my lord, King David, live forever!”

    32: Then King David said, “Call Zadok the priest, Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah, son of Jehoiada.” When they had entered the king’s presence, 
    33: he said to them: “Take with you the royal officials. Mount my son Solomon upon my own mule and escort him down to Gihon. 
    34: There Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet shall anoint him king over Israel, and you shall blow the ram’s horn and cry, ‘Long live King Solomon!’ 
    35: When you come back up with him, he is to go in and sit upon my throne. It is he that shall be king in my place: him I designate ruler of Israel and of Judah.” 
    36: Benaiah, son of Jehoiada, answered the king: “So be it! May the Lord, the God of my lord the king, so decree! 
    37: As the Lord has been with my lord the king, so may he be with Solomon, and make his throne even greater than that of my lord, King David!”

    38: So Zadok the priest, Nathan the prophet, Benaiah, son of Jehoiada, and the Cherethites and Pelethites went down, and mounting Solomon on King David’s mule, escorted him to Gihon. 
    39: Then Zadok the priest took the horn of oil from the tent and anointed Solomon. They blew the ram’s horn and all the people shouted, “Long live King Solomon!” 
    40: Then all the people went up after him, playing flutes and rejoicing so much the earth split with their shouting.
Adonijah Submits to Solomon. 
    41: Adonijah and all the guests who were with him heard it, just as they ended their banquet. When Joab heard the sound of the ram’s horn, he asked, “Why this uproar in the city?” 
    42: As he was speaking, Jonathan, son of Abiathar the priest, arrived. Adonijah said, “Come, you are a man of worth and must bring good news.” 
    43: Jonathan answered Adonijah, “Hardly! Our lord, King David, has made Solomon king. 
    44: The king sent with him Zadok the priest, Nathan the prophet, Benaiah, son of Jehoiada, and the Cherethites and Pelethites, and they mounted him upon the king’s own mule. 
    45: Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet anointed him king at Gihon, and they went up from there rejoicing, so that the city is in an uproar. That is the noise you hear. 
    46: Moreover, Solomon has taken his seat on the royal throne, 
    47: and moreover the king’s servants have come to pay their respects to our lord, King David, saying, ‘May your God make Solomon’s name more famous than your name, his throne greater than your throne!’ And the king in his bed did homage. 
    48: This is what the king said: ‘Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel, who has this day provided one to sit upon my throne, so that I see it with my own eyes.’” 
    49: All the guests of Adonijah got up trembling, and went each their way, 
    50: but Adonijah, in fear of Solomon, got up and went to grasp the horns of the altar.

    51: It was reported to Solomon: “Adonijah, in fear of King Solomon, is clinging to the horns of the altar and saying, ‘Let King Solomon first swear that he will not kill me, his servant, with the sword.’” 
    52: Solomon answered, “If he proves worthy, not a hair of his shall fall to the ground. But if evil is found in him, he shall die.” 
    53: King Solomon sent to have him brought down from the altar, and he came and paid homage to King Solomon. Solomon then said to him, “Go to your house.”


  Chapter 2.

    1: 
    2: David’s Last Instructions and Death. 1 When the time of David’s death drew near, he gave these instructions to Solomon his son: 2 “I am going the way of all the earth. Be strong and be a man! 
    3: Keep the mandate of the Lord, your God, walking in his ways and keeping his statutes, commands, ordinances, and decrees as they are written in the law of Moses, that you may succeed in whatever you do, and wherever you turn, 
    4: and that the Lord may fulfill the word he spoke concerning me: If your sons so conduct themselves that they walk before me in faithfulness with their whole heart and soul, there shall never be wanting someone of your line on the throne of Israel.

    5: “You yourself know what Joab, son of Zeruiah, did to me—what he did to the two commanders of Israel’s armies, Abner, son of Ner, and Amasa, son of Jether: he killed them and brought the blood of war into a time of peace, and put the blood of war on the belt about his waist and the sandal on his foot. 
    6: Act with all the wisdom you possess; do not let his gray head go down to Sheol in peace. 
    7: But be true to the sons of Barzillai the Gileadite, and have them among those who eat at your table. For they were loyal to me when I was fleeing from your brother Absalom. 
    8: You also have with you Shimei, son of Gera, the Benjaminite of Bahurim, who cursed me bitterly the day I was going to Mahanaim. When he came down to meet me at the Jordan, I swore to him by the Lord: ‘I will not kill you by the sword.’ 
    9: ut you must not let him go unpunished. You are wise; you will know what to do to send his gray head down to Sheol in blood.”

    10: David rested with his ancestors and was buried in the City of David. 
    11: David was king over Israel for forty years: he was king seven years in Hebron and thirty-three years in Jerusalem.
The Kingdom Made Secure. 
    12: Then Solomon sat on the throne of David his father, and his kingship was established.

    13: Adonijah, son of Haggith, came to Bathsheba, the mother of Solomon. “Do you come in peace?” she asked. “In peace,” he answered, 
    14: and he added, “I have something to say to you.” She replied, “Speak.” 
    15: So he said: “You know that the kingship was mine, and all Israel expected me to be king. But the kingship passed me by and went to my brother; by the Lord’s will it went to him. 
    16: But now there is one favor I would ask of you. Do not refuse me.” And she said, “Speak on.” 
    17: He said, “Please ask King Solomon, who will not refuse you, to give me Abishag the Shunamite to be my wife.” 
    18: Bathsheba replied, “Very well, I will speak to the king for you.”

    19: Then Bathsheba went to King Solomon to speak to him for Adonijah, and the king stood up to meet her and paid her homage. Then he sat down upon his throne, and a throne was provided for the king’s mother, who sat at his right. 
    20: She said, “There is one small favor I would ask of you. Do not refuse me.” The king said to her, “Ask it, my mother, for I will not refuse you.” 
    21: So she said, “Let Abishag the Shunamite be given to your brother Adonijah to be his wife.” 
    22: King Solomon answered his mother, “And why do you ask that Abishag the Shunamite be given to Adonijah? Ask the kingship for him as well, for he is my older brother! Ask for him, for Abiathar the priest, for Joab, son of Zeruiah!” 
    23: And King Solomon swore by the Lord: “May God do thus to me and more, if Adonijah has not spoken this word at the cost of his life. 
    24: And now, as the Lord lives, who has established me and set me on the throne of David my father and made for me a house as he promised, this day shall Adonijah be put to death.” 
    25: Then King Solomon sent Benaiah, son of Jehoiada, who struck him dead.

    26: The king said to Abiathar the priest: “Go to your estate in Anathoth. Though you deserve to die, I will not put you to death at this time, because you carried the ark of the Lord God before David my father and shared in all the hardships my father endured.” 
    27: So Solomon dismissed Abiathar from the office of priest of the Lord, thus fulfilling the word the Lord had spoken in Shiloh against the house of Eli.

    28: When the news came to Joab, since he had sided with Adonijah, though not with Absalom, he fled to the tent of the Lord and clung to the horns of the altar. 
    29: King Solomon was told, “Joab has fled to the tent of the Lord and is by the altar.” He sent Benaiah, son of Jehoiada, with the order, “Go, strike him down.” 
    30: Benaiah went to the tent of the Lord and said to him, “The king says, ‘Come out.’” But he answered, “No! I will die here.” Benaiah reported to the king, “This is what Joab said to me in reply.” 
    31: The king answered him: “Do as he has said. Strike him down and bury him, and remove from me and from my father’s house the blood which Joab shed without provocation. 
    32: The Lord will bring blood upon his own head, because he struck down two men better and more just than himself, and slew them with the sword without my father David’s knowledge: Abner, son of Ner, commander of Israel’s army, and Amasa, son of Jether, commander of Judah’s army. 
    33: Their blood will be upon the head of Joab and his descendants. But upon David and his descendants, upon his house and his throne, there shall be peace forever from the Lord.” 
    34: Benaiah, son of Jehoiada, went back, struck him down and killed him; he was buried in his house in the wilderness. 
    35: The king appointed Benaiah, son of Jehoiada, over the army in his place; Zadok the priest the king put in place of Abiathar.

    36: Then the king summoned Shimei and said to him: “Build yourself a house in Jerusalem and stay there. Do not go anywhere else. 
    37: For the day you leave, and cross the Wadi Kidron, be certain you shall surely die. Your blood shall be upon your own head.” 
    38: Shimei answered the king: “I accept. Your servant will do just as my lord the king has said.” So Shimei stayed in Jerusalem for a long time. 
    39: But three years later, two of Shimei’s servants ran away to Achish, son of Maacah, king of Gath, and Shimei was told, “Your servants are in Gath.” 
    40: So Shimei rose, saddled his donkey, and went to Achish in Gath in search of his servants; and Shimei returned from Gath with his servants. 
    41: When Solomon was told that Shimei had gone from Jerusalem to Gath, and had returned, 
    42: the king summoned Shimei and said to him: “Did I not have you swear by the Lord and warn you clearly, ‘The day you leave and go anywhere else, be certain you shall surely die’? And you answered, ‘I accept and obey.’ 
    43: Why, then, have you not kept the oath of the Lord and the command that I gave you?” 
    44: And the king said to Shimei: “In your heart you know very well the evil that you did to David my father. Now the Lord is bringing your own evil upon your head. 
    45: But King Solomon shall be blessed, and David’s throne shall be established before the Lord forever.” 
    46: The king then gave the order to Benaiah, son of Jehoiada, who went out and struck him dead.
And the royal power was established in Solomon’s hand.


  Chapter 3.

    1: Solomon allied himself by marriage with Pharaoh, king of Egypt. He married the daughter of Pharaoh and brought her to the City of David, until he should finish building his own house, and the house of the Lord, and the wall around Jerusalem. 
    2: 
    3: Early Promise of Solomon’s Reign. 1 Solomon allied himself by marriage with Pharaoh, king of Egypt. He married the daughter of Pharaoh and brought her to the City of David, until he should finish building his own house, and the house of the Lord, and the wall around Jerusalem. 2 The people were sacrificing on the high places, however, for up to that time no house had been built for the name of the Lord. 3 Although Solomon loved the Lord, walking in the statutes of David his father, he offered sacrifice and burned incense on the high places.

    4: The king went to Gibeon to sacrifice there, because that was the great high place. Upon its altar Solomon sacrificed a thousand burnt offerings. 
    5: In Gibeon the Lord appeared to Solomon in a dream at night. God said: Whatever you ask I shall give you. 
    6: Solomon answered: “You have shown great kindness to your servant, David my father, because he walked before you with fidelity, justice, and an upright heart; and you have continued this great kindness toward him today, giving him a son to sit upon his throne. 
    7: Now, Lord, my God, you have made me, your servant, king to succeed David my father; but I am a mere youth, not knowing at all how to act— 
    8: I, your servant, among the people you have chosen, a people so vast that it cannot be numbered or counted. 
    9: ive your servant, therefore, a listening heart to judge your people and to distinguish between good and evil. For who is able to give judgment for this vast people of yours?”

    10: The Lord was pleased by Solomon’s request. 
    11: So God said to him: Because you asked for this—you did not ask for a long life for yourself, nor for riches, nor for the life of your enemies—but you asked for discernment to know what is right— 
    12: I now do as you request. I give you a heart so wise and discerning that there has never been anyone like you until now, nor after you will there be anyone to equal you. 
    13: In addition, I give you what you have not asked for: I give you such riches and glory that among kings there will be no one like you all your days. 
    14: And if you walk in my ways, keeping my statutes and commandments, as David your father did, I will give you a long life. 
    15: Solomon awoke; it was a dream! He went to Jerusalem, stood before the ark of the covenant of the Lord, sacrificed burnt offerings and communion offerings, and gave a feast for all his servants.
Solomon’s Listening Heart. 
    16: Later, two prostitutes came to the king and stood before him. 
    17: One woman said: “By your leave, my lord, this woman and I live in the same house, and I gave birth in the house while she was present. 
    18: On the third day after I gave birth, this woman also gave birth. We were alone; no one else was in the house with us; only the two of us were in the house. 
    19: This woman’s son died during the night when she lay on top of him. 
    20: So in the middle of the night she got up and took my son from my side, as your servant was sleeping. Then she laid him in her bosom and laid her dead son in my bosom. 
    21: I rose in the morning to nurse my son, and he was dead! But when I examined him in the morning light, I saw it was not the son I had borne.” 
    22: The other woman answered, “No! The living one is my son, the dead one is yours.” But the first kept saying, “No! the dead one is your son, the living one is mine!” Thus they argued before the king. 
    23: Then the king said: “One woman claims, ‘This, the living one, is my son, the dead one is yours.’ The other answers, ‘No! The dead one is your son, the living one is mine.’” 
    24: The king continued, “Get me a sword.” When they brought the sword before the king, 
    25: he said, “Cut the living child in two, and give half to one woman and half to the other.” 
    26: The woman whose son was alive, because she was stirred with compassion for her son, said to the king, “Please, my lord, give her the living baby—do not kill it!” But the other said, “It shall be neither mine nor yours. Cut it in two!” 
    27: The king then answered, “Give her the living baby! Do not kill it! She is the mother.” 
    28: When all Israel heard the judgment the king had given, they were in awe of him, because they saw that the king had in him the wisdom of God for giving right judgment.


  Chapter 4.

    1: Solomon was king over all Israel, 
    2: and these were the officials he had in his service:
Azariah, son of Zadok, the priest;

    3: 
    4: Solomon’s Riches: Domestic Affairs. 1 Solomon was king over all Israel, 2 and these were the officials he had in his service:
Azariah, son of Zadok, the priest;
3 Elihoreph and Ahijah, sons of Shisha, scribes;
Jehoshaphat, son of Ahilud, the chancellor;
4 Benaiah, son of Jehoiada, in charge of the army;
Zadok and Abiathar, priests;

    5: Azariah, son of Nathan, in charge of the governors;
Zabud, son of Nathan, priest and companion to the king;

    6: Ahishar, master of the palace; and
Adoniram, son of Abda, in charge of the forced labor.

    7: Solomon had twelve governors over all Israel who supplied food for the king and his household, each having to provide for one month in the year. 
    8: Their names were:
the son of Hur in the hill country of Ephraim;

    9: he son of Deker in Makaz, Shaalbim, Beth-shemesh, and Elon Beth-hanan;

    10: the son of Hesed in Arubboth, as well as in Socoh and the whole region of Hepher;

    11: the son of Abinadab, in all Naphath-dor; he was married to Taphath, Solomon’s daughter;

    12: Baana, son of Ahilud, in Taanach and Megiddo and all Beth-shean near Zarethan below Jezreel, from Beth-shean to Abel-meholah to beyond Jokmeam;

    13: the son of Geber in Ramoth-gilead, having charge of the villages of Jair, son of Manasseh, in Gilead; and of the district of Argob in Bashan—sixty large walled cities with gates barred with bronze;

    14: Ahinadab, son of Iddo, in Mahanaim;

    15: Ahimaaz, in Naphtali; he was married to Basemath, another daughter of Solomon;

    16: Baana, son of Hushai, in Asher and Aloth;

    17: Jehoshaphat, son of Paruah, in Issachar;

    18: Shimei, son of Ela, in Benjamin;

    19: Geber, son of Uri, in the land of Gilead, the land of Sihon, king of the Amorites, and of Og, king of Bashan.
There was one governor besides, in the land of Judah. 
    20: Judah and Israel were as numerous as the sands by the sea; they ate and drank and rejoiced.


End of day 76.