Day 339:

Reading Hebrews, chapters ['1', '2', '3', '4']:

  Chapter 1.

    1: 1 In times past, God spoke in partial and various ways to our ancestors through the prophets; 
    2: in these last days, he spoke to us through a son, whom he made heir of all things and through whom he created the universe,

    3: 
who is the refulgence of his glory,
    the very imprint of his being,
and who sustains all things by his mighty word.
When he had accomplished purification from sins,
he took his seat at the right hand of the Majesty on high,

    4: 
as far superior to the angels
as the name he has inherited is more excellent than theirs.
II. The Son Higher Than the Angels
Messianic Enthronement. 
    5: For to which of the angels did God ever say:
“You are my son; this day I have begotten you”?
Or again:
“I will be a father to him, and he shall be a son to me”?

    6: And again, when he leads the first-born into the world, he says:
“Let all the angels of God worship him.”

    7: Of the angels he says:
“He makes his angels winds
    and his ministers a fiery flame”;

    8: but of the Son:
“Your throne, O God, stands forever and ever;
    and a righteous scepter is the scepter of your kingdom.

    9: You loved justice and hated wickedness;
    therefore God, your God, anointed you
    with the oil of gladness above your companions”;

    10: and:
“At the beginning, O Lord, you established the earth,
    and the heavens are the works of your hands.

    11: 
They will perish, but you remain;
    and they will all grow old like a garment.

    12: 
You will roll them up like a cloak,
    and like a garment they will be changed.
But you are the same, and your years will have no end.”

    13: But to which of the angels has he ever said:
“Sit at my right hand
    until I make your enemies your footstool”?

    14: Are they not all ministering spirits sent to serve, for the sake of those who are to inherit salvation?


  Chapter 2.

    1: 
    2: Exhortation to Faithfulness. 1 Therefore, we must attend all the more to what we have heard, so that we may not be carried away. 2 For if the word announced through angels proved firm, and every transgression and disobedience received its just recompense, 
    3: how shall we escape if we ignore so great a salvation? Announced originally through the Lord, it was confirmed for us by those who had heard. 
    4: God added his testimony by signs, wonders, various acts of power, and distribution of the gifts of the holy Spirit according to his will.
Exaltation Through Abasement. 
    5: For it was not to angels that he subjected the world to come, of which we are speaking. 
    6: Instead, someone has testified somewhere:
“What is man that you are mindful of him,
    or the son of man that you care for him?

    7: 
You made him for a little while lower than the angels;
    you crowned him with glory and honor,

    8: 
    subjecting all things under his feet.”
In “subjecting” all things , he left nothing not “subject to him.” Yet at present we do not see “all things subject to him,” 
    9: ut we do see Jesus “crowned with glory and honor” because he suffered death, he who “for a little while” was made “lower than the angels,” that by the grace of God he might taste death for everyone.

    10: For it was fitting that he, for whom and through whom all things exist, in bringing many children to glory, should make the leader to their salvation perfect through suffering. 
    11: He who consecrates and those who are being consecrated all have one origin. Therefore, he is not ashamed to call them “brothers,” 
    12: saying:
“I will proclaim your name to my brothers,
    in the midst of the assembly I will praise you”;

    13: and again:
“I will put my trust in him”;
and again:
“Behold, I and the children God has given me.”

    14: Now since the children share in blood and flesh, he likewise shared in them, that through death he might destroy the one who has the power of death, that is, the devil, 
    15: and free those who through fear of death had been subject to slavery all their life. 
    16: Surely he did not help angels but rather the descendants of Abraham; 
    17: therefore, he had to become like his brothers in every way, that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest before God to expiate the sins of the people. 
    18: Because he himself was tested through what he suffered, he is able to help those who are being tested.


  Chapter 3.

    1: Therefore, holy “brothers,” sharing in a heavenly calling, reflect on Jesus, the apostle and high priest of our confession, 
    2: 
    3: Jesus, Superior to Moses. 1 Therefore, holy “brothers,” sharing in a heavenly calling, reflect on Jesus, the apostle and high priest of our confession, 2 who was faithful to the one who appointed him, just as Moses was “faithful in [all] his house.” 3 But he is worthy of more “glory” than Moses, as the founder of a house has more “honor” than the house itself. 
    4: Every house is founded by someone, but the founder of all is God. 
    5: Moses was “faithful in all his house” as a “servant” to testify to what would be spoken, 
    6: but Christ was faithful as a son placed over his house. We are his house, if [only] we hold fast to our confidence and pride in our hope.
Israel’s Infidelity a Warning. 
    7: Therefore, as the holy Spirit says:
“Oh, that today you would hear his voice,

    8: 
    ‘Harden not your hearts as at the rebellion
        in the day of testing in the desert,

    9:     where your ancestors tested and tried me
        and saw my works 
    10: for forty years.
    Because of this I was provoked with that generation
        and I said, “They have always been of erring heart,
        and they do not know my ways.”

    11: 
    As I swore in my wrath,
        “They shall not enter into my rest.”’”

    12: Take care, brothers, that none of you may have an evil and unfaithful heart, so as to forsake the living God. 
    13: Encourage yourselves daily while it is still “today,” so that none of you may grow hardened by the deceit of sin. 
    14: We have become partners of Christ if only we hold the beginning of the reality firm until the end, 
    15: for it is said:
“Oh, that today you would hear his voice:
‘Harden not your hearts as at the rebellion.’”

    16: Who were those who rebelled when they heard? Was it not all those who came out of Egypt under Moses? 
    17: With whom was he “provoked for forty years”? Was it not those who had sinned, whose corpses fell in the desert? 
    18: And to whom did he “swear that they should not enter into his rest,” if not to those who were disobedient? 
    19: And we see that they could not enter for lack of faith.


  Chapter 4.

    1: Therefore, let us be on our guard while the promise of entering into his rest remains, that none of you seem to have failed. 
    2: For in fact we have received the good news just as they did. But the word that they heard did not profit them, for they were not united in faith with those who listened. 
    3: 
    4: The Sabbath Rest. 1 Therefore, let us be on our guard while the promise of entering into his rest remains, that none of you seem to have failed. 2 For in fact we have received the good news just as they did. But the word that they heard did not profit them, for they were not united in faith with those who listened. 3 For we who believed enter into  rest, just as he has said:
“As I swore in my wrath,
    ‘They shall not enter into my rest,’”
and yet his works were accomplished at the foundation of the world. 4 For he has spoken somewhere about the seventh day in this manner, “And God rested on the seventh day from all his works”; 
    5: and again, in the previously mentioned place, “They shall not enter into my rest.” 
    6: Therefore, since it remains that some will enter into it, and those who formerly received the good news did not enter because of disobedience, 
    7: he once more set a day, “today,” when long afterwards he spoke through David, as already quoted:
“Oh, that today you would hear his voice:
‘Harden not your hearts.’”

    8: Now if Joshua had given them rest, he would not have spoken afterwards of another day. 
    9: herefore, a sabbath rest still remains for the people of God. 
    10: And whoever enters into God’s rest, rests from his own works as God did from his. 
    11: Therefore, let us strive to enter into that rest, so that no one may fall after the same example of disobedience.

    12: Indeed, the word of God is living and effective, sharper than any two-edged sword, penetrating even between soul and spirit, joints and marrow, and able to discern reflections and thoughts of the heart. 
    13: No creature is concealed from him, but everything is naked and exposed to the eyes of him to whom we must render an account.
Jesus, Compassionate High Priest. 
    14: Therefore, since we have a great high priest who has passed through the heavens, Jesus, the Son of God, let us hold fast to our confession. 
    15: For we do not have a high priest who is unable to sympathize with our weaknesses, but one who has similarly been tested in every way, yet without sin. 
    16: So let us confidently approach the throne of grace to receive mercy and to find grace for timely help.


End of day 339.