Day 52:

Reading Joshua, chapters ['13', '14', '15', '16']:

  Chapter 13.

    1: 
Division of Land Commanded. 1 When Joshua was old and advanced in years, the Lord said to him: Though now you are old and advanced in years, a very large part of the land still remains to be possessed. 
    2: 
    3: Division of Land Commanded. 1 When Joshua was old and advanced in years, the Lord said to him: Though now you are old and advanced in years, a very large part of the land still remains to be possessed. 2 This is the remaining land: all Geshur and all the districts of the Philistines 3 (from the stream adjoining Egypt to the boundary of Ekron in the north is reckoned Canaanite territory, though held by the five lords of the Philistines in Gaza, Ashdod, Ashkelon, Gath, and Ekron); 
    4: also where the Avvim are in the south; all the land of the Canaanites from Mearah of the Sidonians to Aphek, and the boundaries of the Amorites; 
    5: and the Gebalite territory; and all the Lebanon on the east, from Baal-gad at the foot of Mount Hermon to Lebo-hamath. 
    6: All the inhabitants of the mountain regions between Lebanon and Misrephoth-maim, all Sidonians, I will drive out before the Israelites; at least include these areas in the division of the Israelite heritage, just as I have commanded you. 
    7: Now, therefore, apportion among the nine tribes and the half-tribe of Manasseh the land which is to be their heritage.
The Eastern Tribes. 
    8: Now the other half of the tribe of Manasseh, as well as the Reubenites and Gadites, had taken as their heritage what Moses, the servant of the Lord, had given them east of the Jordan: 
    9: rom Aroer on the bank of the Wadi Arnon and the city in the wadi itself, through the tableland of Medeba and Dibon, 
    10: with the rest of the cities of Sihon, king of the Amorites, who reigned in Heshbon, to the boundary of the Ammonites; 
    11: also Gilead and the territory of the Geshurites and Maacathites, all Mount Hermon, and all Bashan as far as Salecah, 
    12: 
    13: Division of Land Commanded. 1 When Joshua was old and advanced in years, the Lord said to him: Though now you are old and advanced in years, a very large part of the land still remains to be possessed. 2 This is the remaining land: all Geshur and all the districts of the Philistines 3 (from the stream adjoining Egypt to the boundary of Ekron in the north is reckoned Canaanite territory, though held by the five lords of the Philistines in Gaza, Ashdod, Ashkelon, Gath, and Ekron); 4 also where the Avvim are in the south; all the land of the Canaanites from Mearah of the Sidonians to Aphek, and the boundaries of the Amorites; 5 and the Gebalite territory; and all the Lebanon on the east, from Baal-gad at the foot of Mount Hermon to Lebo-hamath. 6 All the inhabitants of the mountain regions between Lebanon and Misrephoth-maim, all Sidonians, I will drive out before the Israelites; at least include these areas in the division of the Israelite heritage, just as I have commanded you. 7 Now, therefore, apportion among the nine tribes and the half-tribe of Manasseh the land which is to be their heritage.
The Eastern Tribes. 8 Now the other half of the tribe of Manasseh, as well as the Reubenites and Gadites, had taken as their heritage what Moses, the servant of the Lord, had given them east of the Jordan: 9 from Aroer on the bank of the Wadi Arnon and the city in the wadi itself, through the tableland of Medeba and Dibon, 10 with the rest of the cities of Sihon, king of the Amorites, who reigned in Heshbon, to the boundary of the Ammonites; 11 also Gilead and the territory of the Geshurites and Maacathites, all Mount Hermon, and all Bashan as far as Salecah, 12 the entire kingdom in Bashan of Og, who was king at Ashtaroth and Edrei (he was a holdover from the remnant of the Rephaim). These Moses defeated and dispossessed. 13 But the Israelites did not dispossess the Geshurites and Maacathites, so that Geshur and Maacath dwell in the midst of Israel to this day. 
    14: However, Moses assigned no heritage to the tribe of Levi; the Lord, the God of Israel, is their heritage, as the Lord had promised them.
Reuben. 
    15: This is what Moses gave to the tribe of the Reubenites by their clans: 
    16: Their territory reached from Aroer, on the bank of the Wadi Arnon, and the city in the wadi itself, through the tableland about Medeba, 
    17: to include Heshbon and all its towns on the tableland, Dibon, Bamoth-baal, Beth-baal-meon, 
    18: Jahaz, Kedemoth, Mephaath, 
    19: Kiriathaim, Sibmah, Zereth-shahar on the knoll within the valley, 
    20: Beth-peor, the slopes of Pisgah, Beth-jeshimoth, 
    21: and the other cities of the tableland and of the whole kingdom of Sihon. This Amorite king, who reigned in Heshbon, Moses had defeated, with the princes of Midian, vassals of Sihon who were settled in the land: Evi, Rekem, Zur, Hur, and Reba; 
    22: Balaam, son of Beor, the diviner, the Israelites killed with the sword, together with those they struck down. 
    23: The boundary of the Reubenites was the Jordan. These cities and their villages were the heritage of the Reubenites by their clans.
Gad. 
    24: This is what Moses gave to the tribe of the Gadites by their clans: 
    25: Their territory included Jazer, all the cities of Gilead, and half the land of the Ammonites as far as Aroer, toward Rabbah 
    26: (that is, from Heshbon to Ramath-mizpeh and Betonim, and from Mahanaim to the boundary of Lo-debar); 
    27: and in the Jordan valley: Beth-haram, Beth-nimrah, Succoth, Zaphon, the other part of the kingdom of Sihon, king of Heshbon, with the bank of the Jordan to the southeastern tip of the Sea of Chinnereth. 
    28: These cities and their villages were the heritage of the clans of the Gadites.
Manasseh. 
    29: This is what Moses gave to the half-tribe of Manasseh; the half-tribe of the Manassites, by their clans, had 
    30: territory including Mahanaim, all of Bashan, the entire kingdom of Og, king of Bashan, and all the villages of Jair, which are sixty cities in Bashan. 
    31: Half of Gilead, with Ashtaroth and Edrei, royal cities of Og in Bashan, fell to the descendants of Machir, son of Manasseh, to half the Machirites, by their clans.

    32: These are the heritages which Moses gave when he was in the plains of Moab, beyond the Jordan east of Jericho. 
    33: But Moses gave no heritage to the tribe of Levi: the Lord, the God of Israel, is their heritage, as he had promised them.


  Chapter 14.

    1: 
The Western Tribes. 1 These are the portions which the Israelites received as heritage in the land of Canaan. Eleazar the priest, Joshua, son of Nun, and the heads of families in the tribes of the Israelites determined 
    2: their heritage by lot, as the Lord had commanded through Moses concerning the remaining nine and a half tribes. 
    3: 
    4: The Western Tribes. 1 These are the portions which the Israelites received as heritage in the land of Canaan. Eleazar the priest, Joshua, son of Nun, and the heads of families in the tribes of the Israelites determined 2 their heritage by lot, as the Lord had commanded through Moses concerning the remaining nine and a half tribes. 3 To two and a half tribes Moses had already given a heritage beyond the Jordan; to the Levites he had given no heritage among them: 4 the descendants of Joseph formed two tribes, Manasseh and Ephraim. But the Levites were given no share of the land except cities to live in, with their pasture lands for the herds and flocks.

    5: As the Lord had commanded Moses, so the Israelites did: they apportioned the land.
Caleb’s Portion. 
    6: When the Judahites approached Joshua in Gilgal, the Kenizzite Caleb, son of Jephunneh, said to him: “You know the word the Lord spoke to Moses, the man of God, concerning you and concerning me in Kadesh-barnea. 
    7: I was forty years old when Moses, the servant of the Lord, sent me from Kadesh-barnea to reconnoiter the land; and I brought back to him a frank report. 
    8: My fellow scouts who went up with me made the people’s confidence melt away, but I was completely loyal to the Lord, my God. 
    9: n that occasion Moses swore this oath, ‘The land where you have set foot shall become your heritage and that of your descendants forever, because you have been completely loyal to the Lord, my God.’ 
    10: Now, as he promised, the Lord has preserved me these forty-five years since the Lord spoke thus to Moses while Israel journeyed in the wilderness; and now I am eighty-five years old, 
    11: but I am still as strong today as I was the day Moses sent me forth, with no less vigor whether it be for war or for any other tasks. 
    12: Now give me this mountain region which the Lord promised me that day, as you yourself heard. True, the Anakim are there, with large fortified cities, but if the Lord is with me I shall be able to dispossess them, as the Lord promised.” 
    13: 
    14: The Western Tribes. 1 These are the portions which the Israelites received as heritage in the land of Canaan. Eleazar the priest, Joshua, son of Nun, and the heads of families in the tribes of the Israelites determined 2 their heritage by lot, as the Lord had commanded through Moses concerning the remaining nine and a half tribes. 3 To two and a half tribes Moses had already given a heritage beyond the Jordan; to the Levites he had given no heritage among them: 4 the descendants of Joseph formed two tribes, Manasseh and Ephraim. But the Levites were given no share of the land except cities to live in, with their pasture lands for the herds and flocks.
5 As the Lord had commanded Moses, so the Israelites did: they apportioned the land.
Caleb’s Portion. 6 When the Judahites approached Joshua in Gilgal, the Kenizzite Caleb, son of Jephunneh, said to him: “You know the word the Lord spoke to Moses, the man of God, concerning you and concerning me in Kadesh-barnea. 7 I was forty years old when Moses, the servant of the Lord, sent me from Kadesh-barnea to reconnoiter the land; and I brought back to him a frank report. 8 My fellow scouts who went up with me made the people’s confidence melt away, but I was completely loyal to the Lord, my God. 9 On that occasion Moses swore this oath, ‘The land where you have set foot shall become your heritage and that of your descendants forever, because you have been completely loyal to the Lord, my God.’ 10 Now, as he promised, the Lord has preserved me these forty-five years since the Lord spoke thus to Moses while Israel journeyed in the wilderness; and now I am eighty-five years old, 11 but I am still as strong today as I was the day Moses sent me forth, with no less vigor whether it be for war or for any other tasks. 12 Now give me this mountain region which the Lord promised me that day, as you yourself heard. True, the Anakim are there, with large fortified cities, but if the Lord is with me I shall be able to dispossess them, as the Lord promised.” 13 Joshua blessed Caleb, son of Jephunneh, and gave him Hebron as his heritage. 14 Therefore Hebron remains the heritage of the Kenizzite Caleb, son of Jephunneh, to the present day, because he was completely loyal to the Lord, the God of Israel. 
    15: Hebron was formerly called Kiriath-arba, for Arba, the greatest among the Anakim. And the land had rest from war.


  Chapter 15.

    1: 
Boundaries of Judah. 1 The lot for the tribe of Judah by their clans fell toward the boundary of Edom, the wilderness of Zin in the Negeb, in the extreme south. 
    2: Their southern boundary ran from the end of the Salt Sea, from the tongue of land that faces the Negeb, 
    3: and went southward below the pass of Akrabbim, across through Zin, up to a point south of Kadesh-barnea, across to Hezron, and up to Addar; from there, looping around Karka, 
    4: 
    5: Boundaries of Judah. 1 The lot for the tribe of Judah by their clans fell toward the boundary of Edom, the wilderness of Zin in the Negeb, in the extreme south. 2 Their southern boundary ran from the end of the Salt Sea, from the tongue of land that faces the Negeb, 3 and went southward below the pass of Akrabbim, across through Zin, up to a point south of Kadesh-barnea, across to Hezron, and up to Addar; from there, looping around Karka, 4 it crossed to Azmon and then joined the Wadi of Egypt[b] before coming out at the sea. (This is your southern boundary.) 5 The eastern boundary was the Salt Sea as far as the mouth of the Jordan.
The northern boundary climbed northward from the tongue of the sea, toward the mouth of the Jordan, 
    6: up to Beth-hoglah, and ran north of Beth-arabah, up to Eben-Bohan-ben-Reuben. 
    7: Thence the boundary climbed to Debir, north of the Valley of Achor, in the direction of the Gilgal that faces the pass of Adummim, on the south side of the wadi; from there it crossed to the waters of En-shemesh and emerged at En-rogel. 
    8: Climbing again to the Valley of Ben-hinnom on the southern flank of the Jebusites (that is, Jerusalem), the boundary rose to the top of the mountain at the northern end of the Valley of Rephaim, which bounds the Valley of Hinnom on the west. 
    9: rom the top of the mountain it ran to the fountain of waters of Nephtoah, extended to the cities of Mount Ephron, and continued to Baalah, or Kiriath-jearim. 
    10: From Baalah the boundary curved westward to Mount Seir and passed north of the ridge of Mount Jearim (that is, Chesalon); it descended to Beth-shemesh, and ran across to Timnah. 
    11: It then extended along the northern flank of Ekron, continued through Shikkeron, and across to Mount Baalah, from there to include Jabneel, before it came out at the sea. 
    12: The western boundary was the Great Sea and its coast. This was the complete boundary of the Judahites by their clans.
Conquest by Caleb. 
    13: As the Lord had commanded, Joshua gave Caleb, son of Jephunneh, a portion among the Judahites, namely, Kiriath-arba (Arba was the father of Anak), that is, Hebron. 
    14: 
    15: Boundaries of Judah. 1 The lot for the tribe of Judah by their clans fell toward the boundary of Edom, the wilderness of Zin in the Negeb, in the extreme south. 2 Their southern boundary ran from the end of the Salt Sea, from the tongue of land that faces the Negeb, 3 and went southward below the pass of Akrabbim, across through Zin, up to a point south of Kadesh-barnea, across to Hezron, and up to Addar; from there, looping around Karka, 4 it crossed to Azmon and then joined the Wadi of Egypt[b] before coming out at the sea. (This is your southern boundary.) 5 The eastern boundary was the Salt Sea as far as the mouth of the Jordan.
The northern boundary climbed northward from the tongue of the sea, toward the mouth of the Jordan, 6 up to Beth-hoglah, and ran north of Beth-arabah, up to Eben-Bohan-ben-Reuben. 7 Thence the boundary climbed to Debir, north of the Valley of Achor, in the direction of the Gilgal that faces the pass of Adummim, on the south side of the wadi; from there it crossed to the waters of En-shemesh and emerged at En-rogel. 8 Climbing again to the Valley of Ben-hinnom[c] on the southern flank of the Jebusites (that is, Jerusalem), the boundary rose to the top of the mountain at the northern end of the Valley of Rephaim, which bounds the Valley of Hinnom on the west. 9 From the top of the mountain it ran to the fountain of waters of Nephtoah, extended to the cities of Mount Ephron, and continued to Baalah, or Kiriath-jearim. 10 From Baalah the boundary curved westward to Mount Seir and passed north of the ridge of Mount Jearim (that is, Chesalon); it descended to Beth-shemesh, and ran across to Timnah. 11 It then extended along the northern flank of Ekron, continued through Shikkeron, and across to Mount Baalah, from there to include Jabneel, before it came out at the sea. 12 The western boundary was the Great Sea[d] and its coast. This was the complete boundary of the Judahites by their clans.
Conquest by Caleb. 13 As the Lord had commanded, Joshua gave Caleb, son of Jephunneh, a portion among the Judahites, namely, Kiriath-arba (Arba was the father of Anak), that is, Hebron. 14 And Caleb dispossessed from there the three Anakim, the descendants of Anak: Sheshai, Ahiman, and Talmai. 15 From there he marched up against the inhabitants of Debir, which was formerly called Kiriath-sepher. 
    16: Caleb said, “To the man who attacks Kiriath-sepher and captures it, I will give my daughter Achsah in marriage.” 
    17: Othniel captured it, the son of Caleb’s brother Kenaz; so Caleb gave him his daughter Achsah in marriage. 
    18: When she came to him, she induced him to ask her father for some land. Then, as she alighted from the donkey, Caleb asked her, “What do you want?” 
    19: She answered, “Give me a present! Since you have assigned to me land in the Negeb, give me also pools of water.” So he gave her the upper and the lower pools.
Cities of Judah. 
    20: This is the heritage of the tribe of Judahites by their clans: 
    21: The cities of the tribe of the Judahites in the extreme southern district toward Edom were: Kabzeel, Eder, Jagur, 
    22: Kinah, Dimonah, Adadah, 
    23: Kedesh, Hazor, and Ithnan; 
    24: Ziph, Telem, Bealoth, 
    25: Hazor-hadattah, and Kerioth-hezron (that is, Hazor); 
    26: Amam, Shema, Moladah, 
    27: Hazar-gaddah, Heshmon, Beth-pelet, 
    28: Hazar-shual, Beer-sheba, and Biziothiah; 
    29: Baalah, Iim, Ezem, 
    30: Eltolad, Chesil, Hormah, 
    31: Ziklag, Madmannah, Sansannah, 
    32: Lebaoth, Shilhim, and Ain and Rimmon; a total of twenty-nine cities with their villages.

    33: In the Shephelah: Eshtaol, Zorah, Ashnah, 
    34: Zanoah, Engannim, Tappuah, Enam, 
    35: Jarmuth, Adullam, Socoh, Azekah, 
    36: Shaaraim, Adithaim, Gederah, and Gederothaim; fourteen cities and their villages. 
    37: Zenan, Hadashah, Migdal-gad, 
    38: Dilean, Mizpeh, Joktheel, 
    39: Lachish, Bozkath, Eglon, 
    40: Cabbon, Lahmas, Chitlish, 
    41: Gederoth, Beth-dagon, Naamah, and Makkedah; sixteen cities and their villages. 
    42: Libnah, Ether, Ashan, 
    43: Iphtah, Ashnah, Nezib, 
    44: Keilah, Achzib, and Mareshah; nine cities and their villages. 
    45: Ekron and its towns and villages; 
    46: from Ekron to the sea, all the towns that lie alongside Ashdod, and their villages; 
    47: Ashdod and its towns and villages; Gaza and its towns and villages, as far as the Wadi of Egypt and the coast of the Great Sea.

    48: In the mountain regions: Shamir, Jattir, Socoh, 
    49: Dannah, Kiriath-sannah (that is, Debir), 
    50: Anab, Eshtemoh, Anim, 
    51: Goshen, Holon, and Giloh; eleven cities and their villages. 
    52: Arab, Dumah, Eshan, 
    53: Janim, Beth-tappuah, Aphekah, 
    54: Humtah, Kiriath-arba (that is, Hebron), and Zior; nine cities and their villages. 
    55: Maon, Carmel, Ziph, Juttah, 
    56: Jezreel, Jokdeam, Zanoah, 
    57: Kain, Gibbeah, and Timnah; ten cities and their villages. 
    58: Halhul, Beth-zur, Gedor, 
    59: Maarath, Beth-anoth, and Eltekon; six cities and their villages. Tekoa, Ephrathah (that is, Bethlehem), Peor, Etam, Kulom, Tatam, Zores, Karim, Gallim, Bether, and Manoko; eleven cities and their villages. 
    60: Kiriath-baal (that is, Kiriath-jearim) and Rabbah; two cities and their villages.

    61: In the wilderness: Beth-arabah, Middin, Secacah, 
    62: Nibshan, Ir-hamelah, and En-gedi; six cities and their villages. 
    63: But the Jebusites who lived in Jerusalem the Judahites could not dispossess; so the Jebusites dwell in Jerusalem beside the Judahites to the present day.


  Chapter 16.

    1: 
The Joseph Tribes. 1 The lot that fell to the Josephites extended from the Jordan at Jericho to the waters of Jericho east of the wilderness; then the boundary went up from Jericho to the heights at Bethel.[b] 
    2: Leaving Bethel for Luz, it crossed the ridge to the border of the Archites at Ataroth, 
    3: and descended westward to the border of the Japhletites, to that of the Lower Beth-horon, and to Gezer, and from there to the sea.
Ephraim. 
    4: Within the heritage of Manasseh and Ephraim, sons of Joseph, 
    5: 
    6: The Joseph Tribes. 1 The lot that fell to the Josephites extended from the Jordan at Jericho to the waters of Jericho east of the wilderness; then the boundary went up from Jericho to the heights at Bethel.[b] 2 Leaving Bethel for Luz, it crossed the ridge to the border of the Archites at Ataroth, 3 and descended westward to the border of the Japhletites, to that of the Lower Beth-horon, and to Gezer, and from there to the sea.
Ephraim. 4 Within the heritage of Manasseh and Ephraim, sons of Joseph, 5 the dividing line[c] for the heritage of the Ephraimites by their clans ran from east of Ataroth-addar to Upper Beth-horon 6 and thence to the sea. From Michmethath on the north, their boundary curved eastward around Taanath-shiloh, and continued east of it to Janoah; 
    7: from there it descended to Ataroth and Naarah, and reaching Jericho, it ended at the Jordan. 
    8: From Tappuah the boundary ran westward to the Wadi Kanah and ended at the sea. This was the heritage of the Ephraimites by their clans, 
    9: ncluding the villages that belonged to each city set aside for the Ephraimites within the heritage of the Manassites. 
    10: But they did not dispossess the Canaanites living in Gezer; they live within Ephraim to the present day, though they have been put to forced labor.


End of day 52.