Day 67:

Reading 1-Samuel, chapters ['21', '22', '23', '24']:

  Chapter 21.

    1: 
    2: 
1 Then David departed on his way, while Jonathan went back into the city.
The Holy Bread. 2 David went to Ahimelech, the priest of Nob, who came trembling to meet him. He asked, “Why are you alone? Is there no one with you?” 
    3: David answered the priest: “The king gave me a commission and told me, ‘Do not let anyone know anything about the business on which I have sent you or the commission I have given you.’ For that reason I have arranged a particular meeting place with my men. 
    4: Now what do you have on hand? Give me five loaves, or whatever you can find.” 
    5: But the priest replied to David, “I have no ordinary bread on hand, only holy bread; if the men have abstained from women, you may eat some of that.” 
    6: David answered the priest: “We have indeed stayed away from women. In the past whenever I went out on a campaign, all the young men were consecrated—even for an ordinary campaign. All the more so are they consecrated with their weapons today!” 
    7: So the priest gave him holy bread, for no other bread was on hand except the showbread which had been removed from before the Lord and replaced by fresh bread when it was taken away. 
    8: One of Saul’s servants was there that day, detained before the Lord; his name was Doeg the Edomite, the chief of Saul’s shepherds.
The Sword of Goliath. 
    9: avid then asked Ahimelech: “Do you have a spear or a sword on hand? I brought along neither my sword nor my weapons, because the king’s business was urgent.” 
    10: The priest replied: “The sword of Goliath the Philistine, whom you killed in the Valley of Elah, is here wrapped in a garment behind an ephod. If you wish to take it, do so; there is no sword here except that one.” “There is none like it,” David cried, “give it to me!”
David a Fugitive. 
    11: That same day David fled from Saul, going to Achish, king of Gath. 
    12: But the servants of Achish said to him, “Is this not David, the king of the land? Is it not for him that during their dances they sing out,
‘Saul has slain his thousands,
    David his tens of thousands’?”

    13: David took note of these remarks and became very much afraid of Achish, king of Gath. 
    14: So, he feigned insanity in front of them and acted like a madman in their custody, drumming on the doors of the gate and drooling onto his beard. 
    15: Finally Achish said to his servants: “You see the man is mad. Why did you bring him to me? 
    16: Do I not have enough madmen, that you bring this one to rant in my presence? Should this fellow come into my house?”


  Chapter 22.

    1: 
    2: 
1 David left Gath and escaped to the cave of Adullam. When his brothers and the rest of his family heard about it, they came down to him there. 2 He was joined by all those in difficulties or in debt, or embittered, and became their leader. About four hundred men were with him.

    3: From there David went to Mizpeh of Moab and said to the king of Moab, “Let my father and mother stay with you, until I learn what God will do for me.” 
    4: He left them with the king of Moab; they stayed with him as long as David remained in the stronghold.

    5: But Gad the prophet said to David: “Do not remain in the stronghold! Leave! Go to the land of Judah.” And so David left and went to the forest of Hereth.
Doeg Betrays Ahimelech. 
    6: Now Saul heard that David and his men had been located. At the time he was sitting in Gibeah under a tamarisk tree on the high place, holding his spear, while all his servants stood by him. 
    7: So he said to them: “Listen, men of Benjamin! Will the son of Jesse give all of you fields and vineyards? Will he appoint any of you an officer over a thousand or a hundred men? 
    8: Is that why you have all conspired against me? Why no one told me that my son had made a pact with the son of Jesse? None of you has shown compassion for me by revealing to me that my son has incited my servant to ambush me, as is the case today.” 
    9: hen Doeg the Edomite, who was standing with Saul’s officers, spoke up: “I saw the son of Jesse come to Ahimelech, son of Ahitub, in Nob. 
    10: He consulted the Lord for him, furnished him with provisions, and gave him the sword of Goliath the Philistine.”
Slaughter of the Priests. 
    11: So the king summoned Ahimelech the priest, son of Ahitub, and all his family, the priests in Nob. They all came to the king. 
    12: “Listen, son of Ahitub!” Saul declared. “Yes, my lord,” he replied. 
    13: Saul questioned him, “Why have you conspired against me with the son of Jesse by giving him food and a sword and by consulting God for him, that he might rise up against me in ambush, as is the case today?” 
    14: Ahimelech answered the king: “Who among all your servants is as loyal as David, the king’s son-in-law, captain of your bodyguard, and honored in your own house? 
    15: Is this the first time I have consulted God for him? No indeed! Let not the king accuse his servant or anyone in my family of such a thing. Your servant knows nothing at all, great or small, about the whole matter.” 
    16: But the king said, “You shall certainly die, Ahimelech, with all your family.” 
    17: The king then commanded his guards standing by him: “Turn and kill the priests of the Lord, for they gave David a hand. They knew he was a fugitive and yet failed to inform me.” But the king’s servants refused to raise a hand to strike the priests of the Lord.

    18: The king therefore commanded Doeg, “You, turn and kill the priests!” So Doeg the Edomite himself turned and killed the priests that day—eighty-five who wore the linen ephod. 
    19: Saul also put the priestly city of Nob to the sword, including men and women, children and infants, and oxen, donkeys and sheep.
Abiathar Escapes. 
    20: One son of Ahimelech, son of Ahitub, named Abiathar, escaped and fled to David. 
    21: 
    22: 1 David left Gath and escaped to the cave of Adullam. When his brothers and the rest of his family heard about it, they came down to him there. 2 He was joined by all those in difficulties or in debt, or embittered, and became their leader. About four hundred men were with him.
3 From there David went to Mizpeh of Moab and said to the king of Moab, “Let my father and mother stay with you, until I learn what God will do for me.” 4 He left them with the king of Moab; they stayed with him as long as David remained in the stronghold.[b]
5 But Gad the prophet said to David: “Do not remain in the stronghold! Leave! Go to the land of Judah.” And so David left and went to the forest of Hereth.
Doeg Betrays Ahimelech. 6 Now Saul heard that David and his men had been located. At the time he was sitting in Gibeah under a tamarisk tree on the high place, holding his spear, while all his servants stood by him. 7 So he said to them: “Listen, men of Benjamin! Will the son of Jesse give all of you fields and vineyards? Will he appoint any of you an officer over a thousand or a hundred men? 8 Is that why you have all conspired against me? Why no one told me that my son had made a pact with the son of Jesse? None of you has shown compassion for me by revealing to me that my son has incited my servant to ambush me, as is the case today.” 9 Then Doeg the Edomite, who was standing with Saul’s officers, spoke up: “I saw the son of Jesse come to Ahimelech, son of Ahitub, in Nob. 10 He consulted the Lord for him, furnished him with provisions, and gave him the sword of Goliath the Philistine.”
Slaughter of the Priests. 11 So the king summoned Ahimelech the priest, son of Ahitub, and all his family, the priests in Nob. They all came to the king. 12 “Listen, son of Ahitub!” Saul declared. “Yes, my lord,” he replied. 13 Saul questioned him, “Why have you conspired against me with the son of Jesse by giving him food and a sword and by consulting God for him, that he might rise up against me in ambush, as is the case today?” 14 Ahimelech answered the king: “Who among all your servants is as loyal as David, the king’s son-in-law, captain of your bodyguard, and honored in your own house? 15 Is this the first time I have consulted God for him? No indeed! Let not the king accuse his servant or anyone in my family of such a thing. Your servant knows nothing at all, great or small, about the whole matter.” 16 But the king said, “You shall certainly die, Ahimelech, with all your family.” 17 The king then commanded his guards standing by him: “Turn and kill the priests of the Lord, for they gave David a hand. They knew he was a fugitive and yet failed to inform me.” But the king’s servants refused to raise a hand to strike the priests of the Lord.
18 The king therefore commanded Doeg, “You, turn and kill the priests!” So Doeg the Edomite himself turned and killed the priests that day—eighty-five who wore the linen ephod. 19 Saul also put the priestly city of Nob to the sword, including men and women, children and infants, and oxen, donkeys and sheep.
Abiathar Escapes. 20 One son of Ahimelech, son of Ahitub, named Abiathar,[c] escaped and fled to David. 21 When Abiathar told David that Saul had slain the priests of the Lord, 22 David said to him: “I knew that day, when Doeg the Edomite was there, that he would certainly tell Saul. I am responsible for the slaughter of all your family. 
    23: Stay with me. Do not be afraid; whoever seeks your life must seek my life also. You are under my protection.”


  Chapter 23.

    1: 
    2: 
    3: Keilah Liberated. 1 David was informed that the Philistines were attacking Keilah and plundering the threshing floors. 2 So he consulted the Lord, asking, “Shall I go and attack these Philistines?” The Lord answered, Go, attack them, and free Keilah. 3 But David’s men said to him: “Even in Judah we have reason to fear. How much more so if we go to Keilah against the forces of the Philistines!” 
    4: Again David consulted the Lord, who answered: Go down to Keilah, for I will deliver the Philistines into your power. 
    5: So David went with his men to Keilah and fought against the Philistines. He drove off their cattle and inflicted a severe defeat on them, and freed the inhabitants of Keilah.

    6: Abiathar, son of Ahimelech, who had fled to David, went down with David to Keilah, taking the ephod with him.
Flight from Keilah. 
    7: When Saul was told that David had entered Keilah, he thought: “God has put him in my hand, for he has boxed himself in by entering a city with gates and bars.” 
    8: Saul then called all the army to war, in order to go down to Keilah and besiege David and his men. 
    9: hen David found out that Saul was planning to harm him, he said to the priest Abiathar, “Bring the ephod here.” 
    10: “Lord God of Israel,” David prayed, “your servant has heard that Saul plans to come to Keilah, to destroy the city on my account. 
    11: Will they hand me over? Will Saul come down as your servant has heard? Lord God of Israel, tell your servant.” The Lord answered: He will come down. 
    12: David then asked, “Will the citizens of Keilah deliver me and my men into the hand of Saul?” The Lord answered: They will deliver you. 
    13: So David and his men, about six hundred in number, left Keilah and wandered from place to place. When Saul was informed that David had fled from Keilah, he did not go forth.
David and Jonathan in Horesh. 
    14: David now lived in the strongholds in the wilderness, or in the barren hill country near Ziph. Though Saul sought him continually, the Lord did not deliver David into his hand. 
    15: While David was in the wilderness of Ziph at Horesh he was afraid that Saul had come out to seek his life. 
    16: Then Saul’s son, Jonathan, came down to David at Horesh and encouraged him in the Lord. 
    17: He said to him: “Have no fear, my father Saul shall not lay a hand to you. You shall be king of Israel and I shall be second to you. Even my father Saul knows this.” 
    18: The two of them made a covenant before the Lord in Horesh, where David remained, while Jonathan returned to his home.
Treachery of the Ziphites. 
    19: Some of the Ziphites went up to Saul in Gibeah and said, “David is hiding among us in the strongholds at Horesh on the hill of Hachilah, south of Jeshimon. 
    20: Therefore, whenever the king wishes to come down, let him do so. It will be our task to deliver him into the king’s hand.” 
    21: Saul replied: “The Lord bless you for your compassion toward me. 
    22: 
    23: Keilah Liberated. 1 David was informed that the Philistines were attacking Keilah and plundering the threshing floors. 2 So he consulted the Lord, asking, “Shall I go and attack these Philistines?” The Lord answered, Go, attack them, and free Keilah. 3 But David’s men said to him: “Even in Judah we have reason to fear. How much more so if we go to Keilah against the forces of the Philistines!” 4 Again David consulted the Lord, who answered: Go down to Keilah, for I will deliver the Philistines into your power. 5 So David went with his men to Keilah and fought against the Philistines. He drove off their cattle and inflicted a severe defeat on them, and freed the inhabitants of Keilah.
6 Abiathar, son of Ahimelech, who had fled to David, went down with David to Keilah, taking the ephod with him.
Flight from Keilah. 7 When Saul was told that David had entered Keilah, he thought: “God has put him in my hand, for he has boxed himself in by entering a city with gates and bars.” 8 Saul then called all the army to war, in order to go down to Keilah and besiege David and his men. 9 When David found out that Saul was planning to harm him, he said to the priest Abiathar, “Bring the ephod here.” 10 “Lord God of Israel,” David prayed, “your servant has heard that Saul plans to come to Keilah, to destroy the city on my account. 11 Will they hand me over? Will Saul come down as your servant has heard? Lord God of Israel, tell your servant.” The Lord answered: He will come down. 12 David then asked, “Will the citizens of Keilah deliver me and my men into the hand of Saul?” The Lord answered: They will deliver you. 13 So David and his men, about six hundred in number, left Keilah and wandered from place to place. When Saul was informed that David had fled from Keilah, he did not go forth.
David and Jonathan in Horesh. 14 David now lived in the strongholds in the wilderness, or in the barren hill country near Ziph. Though Saul sought him continually, the Lord did not deliver David into his hand. 15 While David was in the wilderness of Ziph at Horesh he was afraid that Saul had come out to seek his life. 16 Then Saul’s son, Jonathan, came down to David at Horesh and encouraged him in the Lord. 17 He said to him: “Have no fear, my father Saul shall not lay a hand to you. You shall be king of Israel and I shall be second to you. Even my father Saul knows this.” 18 The two of them made a covenant before the Lord in Horesh, where David remained, while Jonathan returned to his home.
Treachery of the Ziphites. 19 Some of the Ziphites went up to Saul in Gibeah and said, “David is hiding among us in the strongholds at Horesh on the hill of Hachilah, south of Jeshimon. 20 Therefore, whenever the king wishes to come down, let him do so. It will be our task to deliver him into the king’s hand.” 21 Saul replied: “The Lord bless you for your compassion toward me. 22 Go now and make sure once more! Take note of the place where he sets foot for I am told that he is very cunning. 23 Look around and learn in which of all the various hiding places he is holding out. Then come back to me with reliable information, and I will go with you. If he is in the region, I will track him down out of all the families of Judah.” 
    24: So they went off to Ziph ahead of Saul. At this time David and his men were in the wilderness below Maon, in the Arabah south of the wasteland.
Escape from Saul. 
    25: When Saul and his men came looking for him, David got word of it and went down to the gorge in the wilderness below Maon. Saul heard of this and pursued David into the wilderness below Maon. 
    26: As Saul moved along one side of the gorge, David and his men took to the other. David was anxious to escape Saul, while Saul and his men were trying to outflank David and his men in order to capture them. 
    27: Then a messenger came to Saul, saying, “Come quickly, because the Philistines have invaded the land.” 
    28: Saul interrupted his pursuit of David and went to meet the Philistines. This is how that place came to be called the Rock of Divisions.


  Chapter 24.

    1: 
    2: 
David Spares Saul. 1 David then went up from there and stayed in the strongholds of Engedi. 2 When Saul returned from the pursuit of the Philistines, he was told that David was in the desert near Engedi. 
    3: 
    4: David Spares Saul. 1 David then went up from there and stayed in the strongholds of Engedi. 2 When Saul returned from the pursuit of the Philistines, he was told that David was in the desert near Engedi. 3 So Saul took three thousand of the best men from all Israel and went in search of David and his men in the direction of the wild goat crags. 4 When he came to the sheepfolds along the way, he found a cave, which he entered to relieve himself. David and his men were occupying the inmost recesses of the cave.

    5: David’s servants said to him, “This is the day about which the Lord said to you: I will deliver your enemy into your hand; do with him as you see fit.” So David moved up and stealthily cut off an end of Saul’s robe. 
    6: Afterward, however, David regretted that he had cut off an end of Saul’s robe. 
    7: He said to his men, “The Lord forbid that I should do such a thing to my master, the Lord’s anointed, to lay a hand on him, for he is the Lord’s anointed.” 
    8: With these words David restrained his men and would not permit them to attack Saul. Saul then left the cave and went on his way. 
    9: avid also stepped out of the cave, calling to Saul, “My lord the king!” When Saul looked back, David bowed, his face to the ground in homage, 
    10: and asked Saul: “Why do you listen to those who say, ‘David is trying to harm you’? 
    11: You see for yourself today that the Lord just now delivered you into my hand in the cave. I was told to kill you, but I took pity on you instead. I decided, ‘I will not raise a hand against my master, for he is the Lord’s anointed.’ 
    12: Look here, my father. See the end of your robe which I hold. I cut off an end of your robe and did not kill you. Now see and be convinced that I plan no harm and no rebellion. I have done you no wrong, though you are hunting me down to take my life. 
    13: May the Lord judge between me and you. May the Lord exact justice from you in my case. I shall not lay a hand on you. 
    14: As the old proverb says, ‘From the wicked comes wickedness.’ Thus I will not lay a hand on you. 
    15: What is the king of Israel attacking? What are you pursuing? A dead dog! A single flea! 
    16: The Lord will be the judge to decide between us. May the Lord see this, defend my cause, and give me justice against you!”
Saul’s Remorse. 
    17: When David finished saying these things to Saul, Saul answered, “Is that your voice, my son David?” And he wept freely. 
    18: Saul then admitted to David: “You are more in the right than I am. You have treated me graciously, while I have treated you badly. 
    19: You have declared this day how you treated me graciously: the Lord delivered me into your hand and you did not kill me. 
    20: For if someone comes upon an enemy, do they send them graciously on their way? So may the Lord reward you graciously for what you have done this day. 
    21: And now, since I know that you will certainly become king and that the kingship over Israel shall come into your possession, 
    22: swear to me by the Lord that you will not cut off my descendants and that you will not blot out my name from my father’s house.” 
    23: 
    24: David Spares Saul. 1 David then went up from there and stayed in the strongholds of Engedi. 2 When Saul returned from the pursuit of the Philistines, he was told that David was in the desert near Engedi. 3 So Saul took three thousand of the best men from all Israel and went in search of David and his men in the direction of the wild goat crags. 4 When he came to the sheepfolds along the way, he found a cave, which he entered to relieve himself. David and his men were occupying the inmost recesses of the cave.
5 David’s servants said to him, “This is the day about which the Lord said to you: I will deliver your enemy into your hand; do with him as you see fit.” So David moved up and stealthily cut off an end of Saul’s robe. 6 Afterward, however, David regretted that he had cut off an end of Saul’s robe. 7 He said to his men, “The Lord forbid that I should do such a thing to my master, the Lord’s anointed, to lay a hand on him, for he is the Lord’s anointed.” 8 With these words David restrained his men and would not permit them to attack Saul. Saul then left the cave and went on his way. 9 David also stepped out of the cave, calling to Saul, “My lord the king!” When Saul looked back, David bowed, his face to the ground in homage, 10 and asked Saul: “Why do you listen to those who say, ‘David is trying to harm you’? 11 You see for yourself today that the Lord just now delivered you into my hand in the cave. I was told to kill you, but I took pity on you instead. I decided, ‘I will not raise a hand against my master, for he is the Lord’s anointed.’ 12 Look here, my father. See the end of your robe which I hold. I cut off an end of your robe and did not kill you. Now see and be convinced that I plan no harm and no rebellion. I have done you no wrong, though you are hunting me down to take my life. 13 May the Lord judge between me and you. May the Lord exact justice from you in my case. I shall not lay a hand on you. 14 As the old proverb says, ‘From the wicked comes wickedness.’ Thus I will not lay a hand on you. 15 What is the king of Israel attacking? What are you pursuing? A dead dog! A single flea! 16 The Lord will be the judge to decide between us. May the Lord see this, defend my cause, and give me justice against you!”
Saul’s Remorse. 17 When David finished saying these things to Saul, Saul answered, “Is that your voice, my son David?” And he wept freely. 18 Saul then admitted to David: “You are more in the right than I am. You have treated me graciously, while I have treated you badly. 19 You have declared this day how you treated me graciously: the Lord delivered me into your hand and you did not kill me. 20 For if someone comes upon an enemy, do they send them graciously on their way? So may the Lord reward you graciously for what you have done this day. 21 And now, since I know that you will certainly become king and that the kingship over Israel shall come into your possession, 22 swear to me by the Lord that you will not cut off my descendants and that you will not blot out my name from my father’s house.” 23 David gave Saul his oath and Saul returned home, while David and his men went up to the stronghold.


End of day 67.