Day 346:

Reading 1-Peter, chapters ['5']:

  Chapter 5.

    1: So I exhort the presbyters among you, as a fellow presbyter and witness to the sufferings of Christ and one who has a share in the glory to be revealed. 
    2: Tend the flock of God in your midst,  not by constraint but willingly, as God would have it, not for shameful profit but eagerly. 
    3: Do not lord it over those assigned to you, but be examples to the flock. 
    4: 
    5: Advice to Presbyters. 1 So I exhort the presbyters[b] among you, as a fellow presbyter and witness to the sufferings of Christ and one who has a share in the glory to be revealed. 2 Tend the flock of God in your midst, [overseeing] not by constraint but willingly, as God would have it, not for shameful profit but eagerly. 3 Do not lord it over those assigned to you, but be examples to the flock. 4 And when the chief Shepherd is revealed, you will receive the unfading crown of glory.[c]
Advice to the Community.[d] 5 Likewise, you younger members,[e] be subject to the presbyters. And all of you, clothe yourselves with humility in your dealings with one another, for:
“God opposes the proud
    but bestows favor on the humble.”

    6: So humble yourselves under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time. 
    7: Cast all your worries upon him because he cares for you.

    8: Be sober and vigilant. Your opponent the devil is prowling around like a roaring lion looking for  to devour. 
    9: esist him, steadfast in faith, knowing that your fellow believers throughout the world undergo the same sufferings. 
    10: The God of all grace who called you to his eternal glory through Christ  will himself restore, confirm, strengthen, and establish you after you have suffered a little. 
    11: To him be dominion forever. Amen.
V. Conclusion

    12: I write you this briefly through Silvanus, whom I consider a faithful brother, exhorting you and testifying that this is the true grace of God. Remain firm in it. 
    13: The chosen one at Babylon sends you greeting, as does Mark, my son. 
    14: Greet one another with a loving kiss. Peace to all of you who are in Christ.


End of day 346.