Day 319:

Reading 1-Corinthians, chapters ['9', '10', '11', '12']:

  Chapter 9.

    1: Am I not free? Am I not an apostle? Have I not seen Jesus our Lord? Are you not my work in the Lord? 
    2: Although I may not be an apostle for others, certainly I am for you, for you are the seal of my apostleship in the Lord.

    3: My defense against those who would pass judgment on me is this. 
    4: Do we not have the right to eat and drink? 
    5: Do we not have the right to take along a Christian wife, as do the rest of the apostles, and the brothers of the Lord, and Cephas? 
    6: Or is it only myself and Barnabas who do not have the right not to work? 
    7: Who ever serves as a soldier at his own expense? Who plants a vineyard without eating its produce? Or who shepherds a flock without using some of the milk from the flock? 
    8: 
    9: ]
Paul’s Rights as an Apostle. 1 Am I not free? Am I not an apostle? Have I not seen Jesus our Lord? Are you not my work in the Lord? 2 Although I may not be an apostle for others, certainly I am for you, for you are the seal of my apostleship in the Lord.
3 My defense against those who would pass judgment on me[b] is this. 4 [c]Do we not have the right to eat and drink? 5 Do we not have the right to take along a Christian wife, as do the rest of the apostles, and the brothers of the Lord, and Cephas? 6 Or is it only myself and Barnabas who do not have the right not to work? 7 Who ever serves as a soldier at his own expense? Who plants a vineyard without eating its produce? Or who shepherds a flock without using some of the milk from the flock? 8 Am I saying this on human authority, or does not the law also speak of these things? 9 It is written in the law of Moses, “You shall not muzzle an ox while it is treading out the grain.” Is God concerned about oxen, 
    10: or is he not really speaking for our sake? It was written for our sake, because the plowman should plow in hope, and the thresher in hope of receiving a share. 
    11: If we have sown spiritual seed for you, is it a great thing that we reap a material harvest from you? 
    12: If others share this rightful claim on you, do not we still more?
Reason for Not Using His Rights. Yet we have not used this right. On the contrary, we endure everything so as not to place an obstacle to the gospel of Christ. 
    13: Do you not know that those who perform the temple services eat [what] belongs to the temple, and those who minister at the altar share in the sacrificial offerings? 
    14: In the same way, the Lord ordered that those who preach the gospel should live by the gospel.

    15: I have not used any of these rights, however, nor do I write this that it be done so in my case. I would rather die. Certainly no one is going to nullify my boast. 
    16: If I preach the gospel, this is no reason for me to boast, for an obligation has been imposed on me, and woe to me if I do not preach it! 
    17: If I do so willingly, I have a recompense, but if unwillingly, then I have been entrusted with a stewardship. 
    18: What then is my recompense? That, when I preach, I offer the gospel free of charge so as not to make full use of my right in the gospel.
All Things to All. 
    19: Although I am free in regard to all, I have made myself a slave to all so as to win over as many as possible. 
    20: To the Jews I became like a Jew to win over Jews; to those under the law I became like one under the law—though I myself am not under the law—to win over those under the law. 
    21: To those outside the law I became like one outside the law—though I am not outside God’s law but within the law of Christ—to win over those outside the law. 
    22: To the weak I became weak, to win over the weak. I have become all things to all, to save at least some. 
    23: All this I do for the sake of the gospel, so that I too may have a share in it.

    24: Do you not know that the runners in the stadium all run in the race, but only one wins the prize? Run so as to win. 
    25: Every athlete exercises discipline in every way. They do it to win a perishable crown, but we an imperishable one. 
    26: Thus I do not run aimlessly; I do not fight as if I were shadowboxing. 
    27: No, I drive my body and train it, for fear that, after having preached to others, I myself should be disqualified.


  Chapter 10.

    1: 
Warning Against Overconfidence. 1 I do not want you to be unaware, brothers, that our ancestors were all under the cloud and all passed through the sea, 
    2: and all of them were baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the sea. 
    3: All ate the same spiritual food, 
    4: and all drank the same spiritual drink, for they drank from a spiritual rock that followed them, and the rock was the Christ. 
    5: Yet God was not pleased with most of them, for they were struck down in the desert.

    6: These things happened as examples for us, so that we might not desire evil things, as they did. 
    7: And do not become idolaters, as some of them did, as it is written, “The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to revel.” 
    8: Let us not indulge in immorality as some of them did, and twenty-three thousand fell within a single day. 
    9: 
    10: Warning Against Overconfidence. 1 I do not want you to be unaware, brothers, that our ancestors were all under the cloud and all passed through the sea, 2 and all of them were baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the sea. 3 All ate the same spiritual food, 4 and all drank the same spiritual drink, for they drank from a spiritual rock that followed them,[b] and the rock was the Christ. 5 Yet God was not pleased with most of them, for they were struck down in the desert.
6 [c]These things happened as examples for us, so that we might not desire evil things, as they did. 7 And do not become idolaters, as some of them did, as it is written, “The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to revel.” 8 Let us not indulge in immorality as some of them did, and twenty-three thousand fell within a single day. 9 Let us not test Christ[d] as some of them did, and suffered death by serpents. 10 Do not grumble as some of them did, and suffered death by the destroyer. 
    11: These things happened to them as an example, and they have been written down as a warning to us, upon whom the end of the ages has come. 
    12: Therefore, whoever thinks he is standing secure should take care not to fall. 
    13: No trial has come to you but what is human. God is faithful and will not let you be tried beyond your strength; but with the trial he will also provide a way out, so that you may be able to bear it.
Warning Against Idolatry. 
    14: Therefore, my beloved, avoid idolatry. 
    15: I am speaking as to sensible people; judge for yourselves what I am saying. 
    16: The cup of blessing that we bless, is it not a participation in the blood of Christ? The bread that we break, is it not a participation in the body of Christ? 
    17: Because the loaf of bread is one, we, though many, are one body, for we all partake of the one loaf.

    18: Look at Israel according to the flesh; are not those who eat the sacrifices participants in the altar? 
    19: So what am I saying? That meat sacrificed to idols is anything? Or that an idol is anything? 
    20: No, I mean that what they sacrifice,  to demons,[h] not to God, and I do not want you to become participants with demons. 
    21: You cannot drink the cup of the Lord and also the cup of demons. You cannot partake of the table of the Lord and of the table of demons. 
    22: Or are we provoking the Lord to jealous anger? Are we stronger than he?
Seek the Good of Others. 
    23: “Everything is lawful,” but not everything is beneficial. “Everything is lawful,” but not everything builds up. 
    24: No one should seek his own advantage, but that of his neighbor. 
    25: Eat anything sold in the market, without raising questions on grounds of conscience, 
    26: for “the earth and its fullness are the Lord’s.” 
    27: If an unbeliever invites you and you want to go, eat whatever is placed before you, without raising questions on grounds of conscience. 
    28: But if someone says to you, “This was offered in sacrifice,” do not eat it on account of the one who called attention to it and on account of conscience; 
    29: I mean not your own conscience, but the other’s. For why should my freedom be determined by someone else’s conscience? 
    30: If I partake thankfully, why am I reviled for that over which I give thanks?

    31: So whether you eat or drink, or whatever you do, do everything for the glory of God. 
    32: Avoid giving offense, whether to Jews or Greeks or the church of God, 
    33: just as I try to please everyone in every way, not seeking my own benefit but that of the many, that they may be saved.


  Chapter 11.

    1: 
1 Be imitators of me, as I am of Christ.
IV. Problems in Liturgical Assemblies

    2: I praise you because you remember me in everything and hold fast to the traditions, just as I handed them on to you.
A. Women’s Headdresses
Man and Woman. 
    3: But I want you to know that Christ is the head of every man, and a husband the head of his wife, and God the head of Christ. 
    4: Any man who prays or prophesies with his head covered brings shame upon his head. 
    5: But any woman who prays or prophesies with her head unveiled brings shame upon her head, for it is one and the same thing as if she had had her head shaved. 
    6: For if a woman does not have her head veiled, she may as well have her hair cut off. But if it is shameful for a woman to have her hair cut off or her head shaved, then she should wear a veil.

    7: A man, on the other hand, should not cover his head, because he is the image and glory of God, but woman is the glory of man. 
    8: For man did not come from woman, but woman from man; 
    9: or was man created for woman, but woman for man; 
    10: 
    11: 1 Be imitators of me, as I am of Christ.
IV. Problems in Liturgical Assemblies
2 I praise you because you remember me in everything and hold fast to the traditions, just as I handed them on to you.
A. Women’s Headdresses[b]
Man and Woman. 3 But I want you to know that Christ is the head of every man, and a husband the head of his wife,[c] and God the head of Christ. 4 [d]Any man who prays or prophesies with his head covered brings shame upon his head. 5 But any woman who prays or prophesies with her head unveiled brings shame upon her head, for it is one and the same thing as if she had had her head shaved. 6 For if a woman does not have her head veiled, she may as well have her hair cut off. But if it is shameful for a woman to have her hair cut off or her head shaved, then she should wear a veil.
7 [e]A man, on the other hand, should not cover his head, because he is the image and glory of God, but woman is the glory of man. 8 For man did not come from woman, but woman from man; 9 nor was man created for woman, but woman for man; 10 for this reason a woman should have a sign of authority[f] on her head, because of the angels. 11 [g]Woman is not independent of man or man of woman in the Lord. 
    12: For just as woman came from man, so man is born of woman; but all things are from God.

    13: Judge for yourselves: is it proper for a woman to pray to God with her head unveiled? 
    14: Does not nature itself teach you that if a man wears his hair long it is a disgrace to him, 
    15: whereas if a woman has long hair it is her glory, because long hair has been given  for a covering? 
    16: But if anyone is inclined to be argumentative, we do not have such a custom, nor do the churches of God.
B. The Lord’s Supper
An Abuse at Corinth. 
    17: In giving this instruction, I do not praise the fact that your meetings are doing more harm than good. 
    18: First of all, I hear that when you meet as a church there are divisions among you, and to a degree I believe it; 
    19: there have to be factions among you in order that  those who are approved among you may become known.[j] 
    20: When you meet in one place, then, it is not to eat the Lord’s supper, 
    21: for in eating, each one goes ahead with his own supper, and one goes hungry while another gets drunk. 
    22: Do you not have houses in which you can eat and drink? Or do you show contempt for the church of God and make those who have nothing feel ashamed? What can I say to you? Shall I praise you? In this matter I do not praise you.
Tradition of the Institution. 
    23: For I received from the Lord what I also handed on to you, that the Lord Jesus, on the night he was handed over, took bread, 
    24: and, after he had given thanks, broke it and said, “This is my body that is for you. Do this in remembrance of me.” 
    25: In the same way also the cup, after supper, saying, “This cup is the new covenant in my blood. Do this, as often as you drink it, in remembrance of me.” 
    26: For as often as you eat this bread and drink the cup, you proclaim the death of the Lord until he comes.

    27: Therefore whoever eats the bread or drinks the cup of the Lord unworthily will have to answer for the body and blood of the Lord. 
    28: A person should examine himself, and so eat the bread and drink the cup. 
    29: For anyone who eats and drinks without discerning the body, eats and drinks judgment on himself. 
    30: That is why many among you are ill and infirm, and a considerable number are dying. 
    31: If we discerned ourselves, we would not be under judgment; 
    32: but since we are judged by  Lord, we are being disciplined so that we may not be condemned along with the world.

    33: Therefore, my brothers, when you come together to eat, wait for one another. 
    34: If anyone is hungry, he should eat at home, so that your meetings may not result in judgment. The other matters I shall set in order when I come.


  Chapter 12.

    1: 
    2: Unity and Variety. 1 Now in regard to spiritual gifts, brothers, I do not want you to be unaware. 2 You know how, when you were pagans, you were constantly attracted and led away to mute idols. 
    3: Therefore, I tell you that nobody speaking by the spirit of God says, “Jesus be accursed.” And no one can say, “Jesus is Lord,” except by the holy Spirit.

    4: There are different kinds of spiritual gifts but the same Spirit; 
    5: there are different forms of service but the same Lord; 
    6: there are different workings but the same God who produces all of them in everyone. 
    7: To each individual the manifestation of the Spirit is given for some benefit. 
    8: To one is given through the Spirit the expression of wisdom; to another the expression of knowledge according to the same Spirit; 
    9: o another faith by the same Spirit; to another gifts of healing by the one Spirit; 
    10: to another mighty deeds; to another prophecy; to another discernment of spirits; to another varieties of tongues; to another interpretation of tongues. 
    11: 
    12: Unity and Variety. 1 Now in regard to spiritual gifts, brothers, I do not want you to be unaware. 2 You know how, when you were pagans, you were constantly attracted and led away to mute idols. 3 Therefore, I tell you that nobody speaking by the spirit of God says, “Jesus be accursed.” And no one can say, “Jesus is Lord,” except by the holy Spirit.
4 [c]There are different kinds of spiritual gifts but the same Spirit; 5 there are different forms of service but the same Lord; 6 there are different workings but the same God who produces all of them in everyone. 7 To each individual the manifestation of the Spirit is given for some benefit. 8 To one is given through the Spirit the expression of wisdom; to another the expression of knowledge according to the same Spirit; 9 to another faith by the same Spirit; to another gifts of healing by the one Spirit; 10 to another mighty deeds; to another prophecy; to another discernment of spirits; to another varieties of tongues; to another interpretation of tongues. 11 But one and the same Spirit produces all of these, distributing them individually to each person as he wishes.
One Body, Many Parts.[d] 12 As a body is one though it has many parts, and all the parts of the body, though many, are one body, so also Christ. 
    13: For in one Spirit we were all baptized into one body, whether Jews or Greeks, slaves or free persons, and we were all given to drink of one Spirit.

    14: Now the body is not a single part, but many. 
    15: If a foot should say, “Because I am not a hand I do not belong to the body,” it does not for this reason belong any less to the body. 
    16: Or if an ear should say, “Because I am not an eye I do not belong to the body,” it does not for this reason belong any less to the body. 
    17: If the whole body were an eye, where would the hearing be? If the whole body were hearing, where would the sense of smell be? 
    18: But as it is, God placed the parts, each one of them, in the body as he intended. 
    19: If they were all one part, where would the body be? 
    20: But as it is, there are many parts, yet one body. 
    21: The eye cannot say to the hand, “I do not need you,” nor again the head to the feet, “I do not need you.” 
    22: Indeed, the parts of the body that seem to be weaker are all the more necessary, 
    23: and those parts of the body that we consider less honorable we surround with greater honor, and our less presentable parts are treated with greater propriety, 
    24: whereas our more presentable parts do not need this. But God has so constructed the body as to give greater honor to a part that is without it, 
    25: so that there may be no division in the body, but that the parts may have the same concern for one another. 
    26: If  part suffers, all the parts suffer with it; if one part is honored, all the parts share its joy.
Application to Christ.[e] 
    27: Now you are Christ’s body, and individually parts of it. 
    28: Some people God has designated in the church to be, first, apostles; second, prophets; third, teachers; then, mighty deeds; then, gifts of healing, assistance, administration, and varieties of tongues. 
    29: Are all apostles? Are all prophets? Are all teachers? Do all work mighty deeds? 
    30: Do all have gifts of healing? Do all speak in tongues? Do all interpret? 
    31: Strive eagerly for the greatest spiritual gifts.
The Way of Love. But I shall show you a still more excellent way.


End of day 319.