Day 296:

Reading Luke, chapters ['9', '10', '11', '12']:

  Chapter 9.

    1: He summoned the Twelve and gave them power and authority over all demons and to cure diseases, 
    2: and he sent them to proclaim the kingdom of God and to heal . 
    3: He said to them, “Take nothing for the journey, neither walking stick, nor sack, nor food, nor money, and let no one take a second tunic. 
    4: Whatever house you enter, stay there and leave from there. 
    5: And as for those who do not welcome you, when you leave that town, shake the dust from your feet in testimony against them.” 
    6: Then they set out and went from village to village proclaiming the good news and curing diseases everywhere.
Herod’s Opinion of Jesus. 
    7: Herod the tetrarch[e] heard about all that was happening, and he was greatly perplexed because some were saying, “John has been raised from the dead”; 
    8: 
    9: he Mission of the Twelve. 1 He summoned the Twelve and gave them power and authority over all demons and to cure diseases, 2 and he sent them to proclaim the kingdom of God and to heal [the sick]. 3 He said to them, “Take nothing for the journey,[b] neither walking stick, nor sack, nor food, nor money, and let no one take a second tunic. 4 Whatever house you enter, stay there and leave from there. 5 And as for those who do not welcome you, when you leave that town, shake the dust from your feet[c] in testimony against them.” 6 Then they set out and went from village to village proclaiming the good news and curing diseases everywhere.
Herod’s Opinion of Jesus. 7 [d]Herod the tetrarch[e] heard about all that was happening, and he was greatly perplexed because some were saying, “John has been raised from the dead”; 8 others were saying, “Elijah has appeared”; still others, “One of the ancient prophets has arisen.” 9 [f]But Herod said, “John I beheaded. Who then is this about whom I hear such things?” And he kept trying to see him.
The Return of the Twelve and the Feeding of the Five Thousand. 
    10: When the apostles returned, they explained to him what they had done. He took them and withdrew in private to a town called Bethsaida. 
    11: The crowds, meanwhile, learned of this and followed him. He received them and spoke to them about the kingdom of God, and he healed those who needed to be cured. 
    12: As the day was drawing to a close, the Twelve approached him and said, “Dismiss the crowd so that they can go to the surrounding villages and farms and find lodging and provisions; for we are in a deserted place here.” 
    13: He said to them, “Give them some food yourselves.” They replied, “Five loaves and two fish are all we have, unless we ourselves go and buy food for all these people.” 
    14: Now the men there numbered about five thousand. Then he said to his disciples, “Have them sit down in groups of  fifty.” 
    15: They did so and made them all sit down. 
    16: Then taking the five loaves and the two fish, and looking up to heaven, he said the blessing over them, broke them, and gave them to the disciples to set before the crowd. 
    17: They all ate and were satisfied. And when the leftover fragments were picked up, they filled twelve wicker baskets.
Peter’s Confession About Jesus. 
    18: Once when Jesus was praying in solitude, and the disciples were with him, he asked them, “Who do the crowds say that I am?” 
    19: They said in reply, “John the Baptist; others, Elijah; still others, ‘One of the ancient prophets has arisen.’” 
    20: Then he said to them, “But who do you say that I am?” Peter said in reply, “The Messiah of God.” 
    21: He rebuked them and directed them not to tell this to anyone.
The First Prediction of the Passion. 
    22: He said, “The Son of Man must suffer greatly and be rejected by the elders, the chief priests, and the scribes, and be killed and on the third day be raised.”
The Conditions of Discipleship. 
    23: Then he said to all, “If anyone wishes to come after me, he must deny himself and take up his cross daily and follow me. 
    24: For whoever wishes to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for my sake will save it. 
    25: What profit is there for one to gain the whole world yet lose or forfeit himself? 
    26: Whoever is ashamed of me and of my words, the Son of Man will be ashamed of when he comes in his glory and in the glory of the Father and of the holy angels. 
    27: Truly I say to you, there are some standing here who will not taste death until they see the kingdom of God.”
The Transfiguration of Jesus. 
    28: About eight days after he said this, he took Peter, John, and James and went up the mountain to pray. 
    29: While he was praying his face changed in appearance and his clothing became dazzling white. 
    30: And behold, two men were conversing with him, Moses and Elijah, 
    31: who appeared in glory and spoke of his exodus that he was going to accomplish in Jerusalem. 
    32: Peter and his companions had been overcome by sleep, but becoming fully awake, they saw his glory and the two men standing with him. 
    33: As they were about to part from him, Peter said to Jesus, “Master, it is good that we are here; let us make three tents, one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.” But he did not know what he was saying. 
    34: While he was still speaking, a cloud came and cast a shadow over them, and they became frightened when they entered the cloud. 
    35: Then from the cloud came a voice that said, “This is my chosen Son; listen to him.” 
    36: After the voice had spoken, Jesus was found alone. They fell silent and did not at that time tell anyone what they had seen.
The Healing of a Boy with a Demon.[u] 
    37: On the next day, when they came down from the mountain, a large crowd met him. 
    38: There was a man in the crowd who cried out, “Teacher, I beg you, look at my son; he is my only child. 
    39: For a spirit seizes him and he suddenly screams and it convulses him until he foams at the mouth; it releases him only with difficulty, wearing him out. 
    40: I begged your disciples to cast it out but they could not.” 
    41: Jesus said in reply, “O faithless and perverse generation, how long will I be with you and endure you? Bring your son here.” 
    42: As he was coming forward, the demon threw him to the ground in a convulsion; but Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, healed the boy, and returned him to his father. 
    43: And all were astonished by the majesty of God.
The Second Prediction of the Passion. While they were all amazed at his every deed, he said to his disciples, 
    44: “Pay attention to what I am telling you. The Son of Man is to be handed over to men.” 
    45: But they did not understand this saying; its meaning was hidden from them so that they should not understand it, and they were afraid to ask him about this saying.
The Greatest in the Kingdom. 
    46: An argument arose among the disciples about which of them was the greatest. 
    47: Jesus realized the intention of their hearts and took a child and placed it by his side 
    48: and said to them, “Whoever receives this child in my name receives me, and whoever receives me receives the one who sent me. For the one who is least among all of you is the one who is the greatest.”
Another Exorcist. 
    49: Then John said in reply, “Master, we saw someone casting out demons in your name and we tried to prevent him because he does not follow in our company.” 
    50: Jesus said to him, “Do not prevent him, for whoever is not against you is for you.”
V. The Journey to Jerusalem: Luke’s Travel Narrative
Departure for Jerusalem; Samaritan Inhospitality. 
    51: When the days for his being taken up[y] were fulfilled, he resolutely determined to journey to Jerusalem, 
    52: and he sent messengers ahead of him. On the way they entered a Samaritan village to prepare for his reception there, 
    53: but they would not welcome him because the destination of his journey was Jerusalem. 
    54: When the disciples James and John saw this they asked, “Lord, do you want us to call down fire from heaven to consume them?” 
    55: Jesus turned and rebuked them, 
    56: and they journeyed to another village.
The Would-be Followers of Jesus. 
    57: As they were proceeding on their journey someone said to him, “I will follow you wherever you go.” 
    58: Jesus answered him, “Foxes have dens and birds of the sky have nests, but the Son of Man has nowhere to rest his head.” 
    59: And to another he said, “Follow me.” But he replied, “ let me go first and bury my father.” 
    60: But he answered him, “Let the dead bury their dead. But you, go and proclaim the kingdom of God.” 
    61: And another said, “I will follow you, Lord, but first let me say farewell to my family at home.” 
    62:  Jesus said, “No one who sets a hand to the plow and looks to what was left behind is fit for the kingdom of God.”


  Chapter 10.

    1: 
The Mission of the Seventy-two. 1 After this the Lord appointed seventy[-two][b] others whom he sent ahead of him in pairs to every town and place he intended to visit. 
    2: He said to them, “The harvest is abundant but the laborers are few; so ask the master of the harvest to send out laborers for his harvest. 
    3: Go on your way; behold, I am sending you like lambs among wolves. 
    4: Carry no money bag, no sack, no sandals; and greet no one along the way. 
    5: Into whatever house you enter, first say, ‘Peace to this household.’ 
    6: If a peaceful person lives there, your peace will rest on him; but if not, it will return to you. 
    7: Stay in the same house and eat and drink what is offered to you, for the laborer deserves his payment. Do not move about from one house to another. 
    8: Whatever town you enter and they welcome you, eat what is set before you, 
    9: 
    10: The Mission of the Seventy-two. 1 After this the Lord appointed seventy[-two][b] others whom he sent ahead of him in pairs to every town and place he intended to visit. 2 He said to them, “The harvest is abundant but the laborers are few; so ask the master of the harvest to send out laborers for his harvest. 3 Go on your way; behold, I am sending you like lambs among wolves. 4 [c]Carry no money bag, no sack, no sandals; and greet no one along the way. 5 Into whatever house you enter, first say, ‘Peace to this household.’[d] 6 If a peaceful person[e] lives there, your peace will rest on him; but if not, it will return to you. 7 Stay in the same house and eat and drink what is offered to you, for the laborer deserves his payment. Do not move about from one house to another. 8 Whatever town you enter and they welcome you, eat what is set before you, 9 cure the sick in it and say to them, ‘The kingdom of God is at hand for you.’ 10 Whatever town you enter and they do not receive you, go out into the streets and say, 
    11: ‘The dust of your town that clings to our feet, even that we shake off against you.’ Yet know this: the kingdom of God is at hand. 
    12: I tell you, it will be more tolerable for Sodom on that day than for that town.
Reproaches to Unrepentant Towns. 
    13: “Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the mighty deeds done in your midst had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would long ago have repented, sitting in sackcloth and ashes. 
    14: But it will be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the judgment than for you. 
    15: And as for you, Capernaum, ‘Will you be exalted to heaven? You will go down to the netherworld.’ 
    16: Whoever listens to you listens to me. Whoever rejects you rejects me. And whoever rejects me rejects the one who sent me.”
Return of the Seventy-two. 
    17: The seventy returned rejoicing, and said, “Lord, even the demons are subject to us because of your name.” 
    18: Jesus said, “I have observed Satan fall like lightning from the sky. 
    19: Behold, I have given you the power ‘to tread upon serpents’ and scorpions and upon the full force of the enemy and nothing will harm you. 
    20: Nevertheless, do not rejoice because the spirits are subject to you, but rejoice because your names are written in heaven.”
Praise of the Father. 
    21: At that very moment he rejoiced  the holy Spirit and said, “I give you praise, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, for although you have hidden these things from the wise and the learned you have revealed them to the childlike.[i] Yes, Father, such has been your gracious will. 
    22: All things have been handed over to me by my Father. No one knows who the Son is except the Father, and who the Father is except the Son and anyone to whom the Son wishes to reveal him.”
The Privileges of Discipleship. 
    23: Turning to the disciples in private he said, “Blessed are the eyes that see what you see. 
    24: For I say to you, many prophets and kings desired to see what you see, but did not see it, and to hear what you hear, but did not hear it.”
The Greatest Commandment. 
    25: There was a scholar of the law[k] who stood up to test him and said, “Teacher, what must I do to inherit eternal life?” 
    26: Jesus said to him, “What is written in the law? How do you read it?” 
    27: He said in reply, “You shall love the Lord, your God, with all your heart, with all your being, with all your strength, and with all your mind, and your neighbor as yourself.” 
    28: He replied to him, “You have answered correctly; do this and you will live.”
The Parable of the Good Samaritan. 
    29: But because he wished to justify himself, he said to Jesus, “And who is my neighbor?” 
    30: Jesus replied, “A man fell victim to robbers as he went down from Jerusalem to Jericho. They stripped and beat him and went off leaving him half-dead. 
    31: A priest happened to be going down that road, but when he saw him, he passed by on the opposite side. 
    32: Likewise a Levite came to the place, and when he saw him, he passed by on the opposite side. 
    33: But a Samaritan traveler who came upon him was moved with compassion at the sight. 
    34: He approached the victim, poured oil and wine over his wounds and bandaged them. Then he lifted him up on his own animal, took him to an inn and cared for him. 
    35: The next day he took out two silver coins and gave them to the innkeeper with the instruction, ‘Take care of him. If you spend more than what I have given you, I shall repay you on my way back.’ 
    36: Which of these three, in your opinion, was neighbor to the robbers’ victim?” 
    37: He answered, “The one who treated him with mercy.” Jesus said to him, “Go and do likewise.”
Martha and Mary. 
    38: As they continued their journey he entered a village where a woman whose name was Martha welcomed him. 
    39: She had a sister named Mary [who] sat beside the Lord at his feet listening to him speak. 
    40: Martha, burdened with much serving, came to him and said, “Lord, do you not care that my sister has left me by myself to do the serving? Tell her to help me.” 
    41: The Lord said to her in reply, “Martha, Martha, you are anxious and worried about many things. 
    42: There is need of only one thing. Mary has chosen the better part and it will not be taken from her.”


  Chapter 11.

    1: 
The Lord’s Prayer. 1 He was praying in a certain place, and when he had finished, one of his disciples said to him, “Lord, teach us to pray just as John taught his disciples.”[b] 
    2: He said to them, “When you pray, say:
Father, hallowed be your name,
    your kingdom come.

    3: 
    Give us each day our daily bread

    4: 
    and forgive us our sins
    for we ourselves forgive everyone in debt to us,
    and do not subject us to the final test.”
Further Teachings on Prayer. 
    5: And he said to them, “Suppose one of you has a friend to whom he goes at midnight and says, ‘Friend, lend me three loaves of bread, 
    6: for a friend of mine has arrived at my house from a journey and I have nothing to offer him,’ 
    7: and he says in reply from within, ‘Do not bother me; the door has already been locked and my children and I are already in bed. I cannot get up to give you anything.’ 
    8: I tell you, if he does not get up to give him the loaves because of their friendship, he will get up to give him whatever he needs because of his persistence.
The Answer to Prayer. 
    9: And I tell you, ask and you will receive; seek and you will find; knock and the door will be opened to you. 
    10: 
    11: The Lord’s Prayer. 1 He was praying in a certain place, and when he had finished, one of his disciples said to him, “Lord, teach us to pray just as John taught his disciples.”[b] 2 [c]He said to them, “When you pray, say:
Father, hallowed be your name,
    your kingdom come.
3 
    Give us each day our daily bread[d]
4 
    and forgive us our sins
    for we ourselves forgive everyone in debt to us,
    and do not subject us to the final test.”
Further Teachings on Prayer. 5 And he said to them, “Suppose one of you has a friend to whom he goes at midnight and says, ‘Friend, lend me three loaves of bread, 6 for a friend of mine has arrived at my house from a journey and I have nothing to offer him,’ 7 and he says in reply from within, ‘Do not bother me; the door has already been locked and my children and I are already in bed. I cannot get up to give you anything.’ 8 I tell you, if he does not get up to give him the loaves because of their friendship, he will get up to give him whatever he needs because of his persistence.
The Answer to Prayer. 9 “And I tell you, ask and you will receive; seek and you will find; knock and the door will be opened to you. 10 For everyone who asks, receives; and the one who seeks, finds; and to the one who knocks, the door will be opened. 11 What father among you would hand his son a snake when he asks for a fish? 
    12: Or hand him a scorpion when he asks for an egg? 
    13: If you then, who are wicked, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will the Father in heaven give the holy Spirit to those who ask him?”
Jesus and Beelzebul. 
    14: He was driving out a demon  mute, and when the demon had gone out, the mute person spoke and the crowds were amazed. 
    15: Some of them said, “By the power of Beelzebul, the prince of demons, he drives out demons.” 
    16: Others, to test him, asked him for a sign from heaven. 
    17: But he knew their thoughts and said to them, “Every kingdom divided against itself will be laid waste and house will fall against house. 
    18: And if Satan is divided against himself, how will his kingdom stand? For you say that it is by Beelzebul that I drive out demons. 
    19: If I, then, drive out demons by Beelzebul, by whom do your own people drive them out? Therefore they will be your judges. 
    20: But if it is by the finger of God that  drive out demons, then the kingdom of God has come upon you. 
    21: When a strong man fully armed guards his palace, his possessions are safe. 
    22: But when one stronger than he attacks and overcomes him, he takes away the armor on which he relied and distributes the spoils. 
    23: Whoever is not with me is against me, and whoever does not gather with me scatters.
The Return of the Unclean Spirit. 
    24: “When an unclean spirit goes out of someone, it roams through arid regions searching for rest but, finding none, it says, ‘I shall return to my home from which I came.’ 
    25: But upon returning, it finds it swept clean and put in order. 
    26: Then it goes and brings back seven other spirits more wicked than itself who move in and dwell there, and the last condition of that person is worse than the first.”
True Blessedness. 
    27: While he was speaking, a woman from the crowd called out and said to him, “Blessed is the womb that carried you and the breasts at which you nursed.” 
    28: He replied, “Rather, blessed are those who hear the word of God and observe it.”
The Demand for a Sign. 
    29: While still more people gathered in the crowd, he said to them, “This generation is an evil generation; it seeks a sign, but no sign will be given it, except the sign of Jonah. 
    30: Just as Jonah became a sign to the Ninevites, so will the Son of Man be to this generation. 
    31: At the judgment the queen of the south will rise with the men of this generation and she will condemn them, because she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and there is something greater than Solomon here. 
    32: At the judgment the men of Nineveh will arise with this generation and condemn it, because at the preaching of Jonah they repented, and there is something greater than Jonah here.
The Simile of Light. 
    33: “No one who lights a lamp hides it away or places it , but on a lampstand so that those who enter might see the light. 
    34: The lamp of the body is your eye. When your eye is sound, then your whole body is filled with light, but when it is bad, then your body is in darkness. 
    35: Take care, then, that the light in you not become darkness. 
    36: If your whole body is full of light, and no part of it is in darkness, then it will be as full of light as a lamp illuminating you with its brightness.”
Denunciation of the Pharisees and Scholars of the Law. 
    37: After he had spoken, a Pharisee invited him to dine at his home. He entered and reclined at table to eat. 
    38: The Pharisee was amazed to see that he did not observe the prescribed washing before the meal. 
    39: The Lord said to him, “Oh you Pharisees! Although you cleanse the outside of the cup and the dish, inside you are filled with plunder and evil. 
    40: You fools! Did not the maker of the outside also make the inside? 
    41: But as to what is within, give alms, and behold, everything will be clean for you. 
    42: Woe to you Pharisees! You pay tithes of mint and of rue and of every garden herb, but you pay no attention to judgment and to love for God. These you should have done, without overlooking the others. 
    43: Woe to you Pharisees! You love the seat of honor in synagogues and greetings in marketplaces. 
    44: Woe to you! You are like unseen graves over which people unknowingly walk.”

    45: Then one of the scholars of the law said to him in reply, “Teacher, by saying this you are insulting us too.” 
    46: And he said, “Woe also to you scholars of the law! You impose on people burdens hard to carry, but you yourselves do not lift one finger to touch them. 
    47: Woe to you! You build the memorials of the prophets whom your ancestors killed. 
    48: Consequently, you bear witness and give consent to the deeds of your ancestors, for they killed them and you do the building. 
    49: Therefore, the wisdom of God said, ‘I will send to them prophets and apostles; some of them they will kill and persecute’ 
    50: in order that this generation might be charged with the blood of all the prophets shed since the foundation of the world, 
    51: from the blood of Abel to the blood of Zechariah who died between the altar and the temple building. Yes, I tell you, this generation will be charged with their blood! 
    52: Woe to you, scholars of the law! You have taken away the key of knowledge. You yourselves did not enter and you stopped those trying to enter.” 
    53: When he left, the scribes and Pharisees began to act with hostility toward him and to interrogate him about many things, 
    54: for they were plotting to catch him at something he might say.


  Chapter 12.

    1: 
    2: The Leaven of the Pharisees. 1 Meanwhile, so many people were crowding together that they were trampling one another underfoot. He began to speak, first to his disciples, “Beware of the leaven—that is, the hypocrisy—of the Pharisees.
Courage Under Persecution.[b] 2 “There is nothing concealed that will not be revealed, nor secret that will not be known. 
    3: Therefore whatever you have said in the darkness will be heard in the light, and what you have whispered behind closed doors will be proclaimed on the housetops. 
    4: I tell you, my friends, do not be afraid of those who kill the body but after that can do no more. 
    5: I shall show you whom to fear. Be afraid of the one who after killing has the power to cast into Gehenna; yes, I tell you, be afraid of that one. 
    6: Are not five sparrows sold for two small coins? Yet not one of them has escaped the notice of God. 
    7: Even the hairs of your head have all been counted. Do not be afraid. You are worth more than many sparrows. 
    8: I tell you, everyone who acknowledges me before others the Son of Man will acknowledge before the angels of God. 
    9: ut whoever denies me before others will be denied before the angels of God.
Sayings About the Holy Spirit. 
    10: “Everyone who speaks a word against the Son of Man will be forgiven, but the one who blasphemes against the holy Spirit will not be forgiven. 
    11: 
    12: The Leaven of the Pharisees. 1 Meanwhile, so many people were crowding together that they were trampling one another underfoot. He began to speak, first to his disciples, “Beware of the leaven—that is, the hypocrisy—of the Pharisees.
Courage Under Persecution.[b] 2 “There is nothing concealed that will not be revealed, nor secret that will not be known. 3 Therefore whatever you have said in the darkness will be heard in the light, and what you have whispered behind closed doors will be proclaimed on the housetops. 4 I tell you, my friends, do not be afraid of those who kill the body but after that can do no more. 5 I shall show you whom to fear. Be afraid of the one who after killing has the power to cast into Gehenna;[c] yes, I tell you, be afraid of that one. 6 Are not five sparrows sold for two small coins?[d] Yet not one of them has escaped the notice of God. 7 Even the hairs of your head have all been counted. Do not be afraid. You are worth more than many sparrows. 8 I tell you, everyone who acknowledges me before others the Son of Man will acknowledge before the angels of God. 9 But whoever denies me before others will be denied before the angels of God.
Sayings About the Holy Spirit.[e] 10 “Everyone who speaks a word against the Son of Man will be forgiven, but the one who blasphemes against the holy Spirit will not be forgiven. 11 When they take you before synagogues and before rulers and authorities, do not worry about how or what your defense will be or about what you are to say. 12 For the holy Spirit will teach you at that moment what you should say.”
Saying Against Greed. 
    13: Someone in the crowd said to him, “Teacher, tell my brother to share the inheritance with me.” 
    14: He replied to him, “Friend, who appointed me as your judge and arbitrator?” 
    15: Then he said to the crowd, “Take care to guard against all greed, for though one may be rich, one’s life does not consist of possessions.”
Parable of the Rich Fool. 
    16: Then he told them a parable. “There was a rich man whose land produced a bountiful harvest. 
    17: He asked himself, ‘What shall I do, for I do not have space to store my harvest?’ 
    18: And he said, ‘This is what I shall do: I shall tear down my barns and build larger ones. There I shall store all my grain and other goods 
    19: and I shall say to myself, “Now as for you, you have so many good things stored up for many years, rest, eat, drink, be merry!”’ 
    20: But God said to him, ‘You fool, this night your life will be demanded of you; and the things you have prepared, to whom will they belong?’ 
    21: Thus will it be for the one who stores up treasure for himself but is not rich in what matters to God.”
Dependence on God. 
    22: He said to  disciples, “Therefore I tell you, do not worry about your life and what you will eat, or about your body and what you will wear. 
    23: For life is more than food and the body more than clothing. 
    24: Notice the ravens: they do not sow or reap; they have neither storehouse nor barn, yet God feeds them. How much more important are you than birds! 
    25: Can any of you by worrying add a moment to your life-span? 
    26: If even the smallest things are beyond your control, why are you anxious about the rest? 
    27: Notice how the flowers grow. They do not toil or spin. But I tell you, not even Solomon in all his splendor was dressed like one of them. 
    28: If God so clothes the grass in the field that grows today and is thrown into the oven tomorrow, will he not much more provide for you, O you of little faith? 
    29: As for you, do not seek what you are to eat and what you are to drink, and do not worry anymore. 
    30: All the nations of the world seek for these things, and your Father knows that you need them. 
    31: Instead, seek his kingdom, and these other things will be given you besides. 
    32: Do not be afraid any longer, little flock, for your Father is pleased to give you the kingdom. 
    33: Sell your belongings and give alms. Provide money bags for yourselves that do not wear out, an inexhaustible treasure in heaven that no thief can reach nor moth destroy. 
    34: For where your treasure is, there also will your heart be.
Vigilant and Faithful Servants. 
    35: “Gird your loins and light your lamps 
    36: and be like servants who await their master’s return from a wedding, ready to open immediately when he comes and knocks. 
    37: Blessed are those servants whom the master finds vigilant on his arrival. Amen, I say to you, he will gird himself, have them recline at table, and proceed to wait on them. 
    38: And should he come in the second or third watch and find them prepared in this way, blessed are those servants. 
    39: Be sure of this: if the master of the house had known the hour when the thief was coming, he would not have let his house be broken into. 
    40: You also must be prepared, for at an hour you do not expect, the Son of Man will come.”

    41: Then Peter said, “Lord, is this parable meant for us or for everyone?” 
    42: And the Lord replied, “Who, then, is the faithful and prudent steward whom the master will put in charge of his servants to distribute  food allowance at the proper time? 
    43: Blessed is that servant whom his master on arrival finds doing so. 
    44: Truly, I say to you, he will put him in charge of all his property. 
    45: But if that servant says to himself, ‘My master is delayed in coming,’ and begins to beat the menservants and the maidservants, to eat and drink and get drunk, 
    46: then that servant’s master will come on an unexpected day and at an unknown hour and will punish him severely and assign him a place with the unfaithful. 
    47: That servant who knew his master’s will but did not make preparations nor act in accord with his will shall be beaten severely; 
    48: and the servant who was ignorant of his master’s will but acted in a way deserving of a severe beating shall be beaten only lightly. Much will be required of the person entrusted with much, and still more will be demanded of the person entrusted with more.
Jesus: A Cause of Division. 
    49: “I have come to set the earth on fire, and how I wish it were already blazing! 
    50: There is a baptism with which I must be baptized, and how great is my anguish until it is accomplished! 
    51: Do you think that I have come to establish peace on the earth? No, I tell you, but rather division. 
    52: From now on a household of five will be divided, three against two and two against three; 
    53: a father will be divided against his son and a son against his father, a mother against her daughter and a daughter against her mother, a mother-in-law against her daughter-in-law and a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law.”
Signs of the Times. 
    54: He also said to the crowds, “When you see  cloud rising in the west you say immediately that it is going to rain—and so it does; 
    55: and when you notice that the wind is blowing from the south you say that it is going to be hot—and so it is. 
    56: You hypocrites! You know how to interpret the appearance of the earth and the sky; why do you not know how to interpret the present time?
Settlement with an Opponent. 
    57: “Why do you not judge for yourselves what is right? 
    58: If you are to go with your opponent before a magistrate, make an effort to settle the matter on the way; otherwise your opponent will turn you over to the judge, and the judge hand you over to the constable, and the constable throw you into prison. 
    59: I say to you, you will not be released until you have paid the last penny.”


End of day 296.