Day 353:

Reading Revelation, chapters ['1', '2', '3', '4']:

  Chapter 1.

    1: 1 The revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave to him, to show his servants what must happen soon. He made it known by sending his angel to his servant John, 
    2: who gives witness to the word of God and to the testimony of Jesus Christ by reporting what he saw. 
    3: Blessed is the one who reads aloud and blessed are those who listen to this prophetic message and heed what is written in it, for the appointed time is near.
II. Letters to the Churches of Asia
Greeting.[c] 
    4: John, to the seven churches in Asia: grace to you and peace from him who is and who was and who is to come, and from the seven spirits before his throne, 
    5: and from Jesus Christ, the faithful witness, the firstborn of the dead and ruler of the kings of the earth. To him who loves us and has freed us from our sins by his blood, 
    6: who has made us into a kingdom, priests for his God and Father, to him be glory and power forever . Amen.

    7: 
Behold, he is coming amid the clouds,
    and every eye will see him,
    even those who pierced him.
All the peoples of the earth will lament him.
    Yes. Amen.

    8: “I am the Alpha and the Omega,” says the Lord God, “the one who is and who was and who is to come, the almighty.”
The First Vision.[g] 
    9: , John, your brother, who share with you the distress, the kingdom, and the endurance we have in Jesus, found myself on the island called Patmos because I proclaimed God’s word and gave testimony to Jesus. 
    10: I was caught up in spirit on the Lord’s day and heard behind me a voice as loud as a trumpet, 
    11: which said, “Write on a scroll what you see and send it to the seven churches: to Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamum, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, and Laodicea.” 
    12: Then I turned to see whose voice it was that spoke to me, and when I turned, I saw seven gold lampstands 
    13: and in the midst of the lampstands one like a son of man, wearing an ankle-length robe, with a gold sash around his chest. 
    14: The hair of his head was as white as white wool or as snow, and his eyes were like a fiery flame. 
    15: His feet were like polished brass refined in a furnace, and his voice was like the sound of rushing water. 
    16: In his right hand he held seven stars. A sharp two-edged sword came out of his mouth, and his face shone like the sun at its brightest.

    17: When I caught sight of him, I fell down at his feet as though dead. He touched me with his right hand and said, “Do not be afraid. I am the first and the last, 
    18: the one who lives. Once I was dead, but now I am alive forever and ever. I hold the keys to death and the netherworld. 
    19: Write down, therefore, what you have seen, and what is happening, and what will happen afterwards. 
    20: This is the secret meaning of the seven stars you saw in my right hand, and of the seven gold lampstands: the seven stars are the angels of the seven churches, and the seven lampstands are the seven churches.


  Chapter 2.

    1: 
    2: To Ephesus. 1 “To the angel of the church[b] in Ephesus,[c] write this:
“‘The one who holds the seven stars in his right hand and walks in the midst of the seven gold lampstands says this: 2 “I know your works, your labor, and your endurance, and that you cannot tolerate the wicked; you have tested those who call themselves apostles but are not, and discovered that they are impostors.[d] 
    3: Moreover, you have endurance and have suffered for my name, and you have not grown weary. 
    4: Yet I hold this against you: you have lost the love you had at first. 
    5: Realize how far you have fallen. Repent, and do the works you did at first. Otherwise, I will come to you and remove your lampstand from its place, unless you repent. 
    6: But you have this in your favor: you hate the works of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate.

    7: “‘“Whoever has ears ought to hear what the Spirit says to the churches. To the victor I will give the right to eat from the tree of life that is in the garden of God.”’
To Smyrna.[g] 
    8: “To the angel of the church in Smyrna, write this:
“‘The first and the last, who once died but came to life, says this: 
    9: I know your tribulation and poverty, but you are rich. I know the slander of those who claim to be Jews and are not, but rather are members of the assembly of Satan. 
    10: Do not be afraid of anything that you are going to suffer. Indeed, the devil will throw some of you into prison, that you may be tested, and you will face an ordeal for ten days. Remain faithful until death, and I will give you the crown of life.

    11: “‘“Whoever has ears ought to hear what the Spirit says to the churches. The victor shall not be harmed by the second death.”’
To Pergamum.[k] 
    12: “To the angel of the church in Pergamum, write this:
“‘The one with the sharp two-edged sword says this: 
    13: “I know that you live where Satan’s throne is, and yet you hold fast to my name and have not denied your faith in me, not even in the days of Antipas, my faithful witness, who was martyred among you, where Satan lives. 
    14: Yet I have a few things against you. You have some people there who hold to the teaching of Balaam, who instructed Balak to put a stumbling block before the Israelites: to eat food sacrificed to idols and to play the harlot. 
    15: Likewise, you also have some people who hold to the teaching of  Nicolaitans. 
    16: Therefore, repent. Otherwise, I will come to you quickly and wage war against them with the sword of my mouth.

    17: “‘“Whoever has ears ought to hear what the Spirit says to the churches. To the victor I shall give some of the hidden manna; I shall also give a white amulet upon which is inscribed a new name, which no one knows except the one who receives it.”’
To Thyatira.[p] 
    18: “To the angel of the church in Thyatira, write this:
“‘The Son of God, whose eyes are like a fiery flame and whose feet are like polished brass, says this: 
    19: “I know your works, your love, faith, service, and endurance, and that your last works are greater than the first. 
    20: Yet I hold this against you, that you tolerate the woman Jezebel, who calls herself a prophetess, who teaches and misleads my servants to play the harlot and to eat food sacrificed to idols. 
    21: I have given her time to repent, but she refuses to repent of her harlotry. 
    22: So I will cast her on a sickbed and plunge those who commit adultery with her into intense suffering unless they repent of her works. 
    23: I will also put her children to death. Thus shall all the churches come to know that I am the searcher of hearts and minds and that I will give each of you what your works deserve. 
    24: But I say to the rest of you in Thyatira, who do not uphold this teaching and know nothing of the so-called deep secrets of Satan: on you I will place no further burden, 
    25: except that you must hold fast to what you have until I come.

    26: 
“‘“To the victor, who keeps to my ways[v] until the end,
    I will give authority over the nations.

    27: 
He will rule them with an iron rod.
    Like clay vessels will they be smashed,

    28: just as I received authority from my Father. And to him I will give the morning star.

    29: “‘“Whoever has ears ought to hear what the Spirit says to the churches.”’


  Chapter 3.

    1: “To the angel of the church in Sardis, write this:
“‘The one who has the seven spirits of God and the seven stars says this: “I know your works, that you have the reputation of being alive, but you are dead. 
    2: 
    3: To Sardis. 1 “To the angel of the church in Sardis,[b] write this:
“‘The one who has the seven spirits of God and the seven stars says this: “I know your works, that you have the reputation of being alive, but you are dead. 2 Be watchful and strengthen what is left, which is going to die, for I have not found your works complete in the sight of my God. 3 Remember then how you accepted and heard; keep it, and repent. If you are not watchful, I will come like a thief, and you will never know at what hour I will come upon you. 
    4: However, you have a few people in Sardis who have not soiled their garments; they will walk with me dressed in white, because they are worthy.

    5: “‘“The victor will thus be dressed in white, and I will never erase his name from the book of life but will acknowledge his name in the presence of my Father and of his angels.

    6: “‘“Whoever has ears ought to hear what the Spirit says to the churches.”’
To Philadelphia. 
    7: “To the angel of the church in Philadelphia, write this:
“‘The holy one, the true,
    who holds the key of David,
    who opens and no one shall close,
    who closes and no one shall open,
says this:

    8: “‘“I know your works (behold, I have left an open door before you, which no one can close). You have limited strength, and yet you have kept my word and have not denied my name. 
    9: ehold, I will make those of the assembly of Satan who claim to be Jews and are not, but are lying, behold I will make them come and fall prostrate at your feet, and they will realize that I love you. 
    10: Because you have kept my message of endurance, I will keep you safe in the time of trial that is going to come to the whole world to test the inhabitants of the earth. 
    11: I am coming quickly. Hold fast to what you have, so that no one may take your crown.

    12: “‘“The victor I will make into a pillar in the temple of my God, and he will never leave it again. On him I will inscribe the name of my God and the name of the city of my God, the new Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven from my God, as well as my new name.

    13: “‘“Whoever has ears ought to hear what the Spirit says to the churches.”’
To Laodicea. 
    14: “To the angel of the church in Laodicea, write this:
“‘The Amen, the faithful and true witness, the source of God’s creation, says this: 
    15: “I know your works; I know that you are neither cold nor hot. I wish you were either cold or hot. 
    16: So, because you are lukewarm, neither hot nor cold, I will spit you out of my mouth. 
    17: For you say, ‘I am rich and affluent and have no need of anything,’ and yet do not realize that you are wretched, pitiable, poor, blind, and naked. 
    18: I advise you to buy from me gold refined by fire so that you may be rich, and white garments to put on so that your shameful nakedness may not be exposed, and buy ointment to smear on your eyes so that you may see. 
    19: Those whom I love, I reprove and chastise. Be earnest, therefore, and repent.

    20: “‘“Behold, I stand at the door and knock. If anyone hears my voice and opens the door,  I will enter his house and dine with him, and he with me.[o] 
    21: I will give the victor the right to sit with me on my throne, as I myself first won the victory and sit with my Father on his throne.

    22: “‘“Whoever has ears ought to hear what the Spirit says to the churches.”’”


  Chapter 4.

    1: After this I had a vision of an open door to heaven, and I heard the trumpetlike voice that had spoken to me before, saying, “Come up here and I will show you what must happen afterwards.” 
    2: At once I was caught up in spirit. A throne was there in heaven, and on the throne sat 
    3: 
    4: Vision of Heavenly Worship. 1 After this I had a vision of an open door[b] to heaven, and I heard the trumpetlike voice that had spoken to me before, saying, “Come up here and I will show you what must happen afterwards.” 2 [c]At once I was caught up in spirit. A throne was there in heaven, and on the throne sat 3 one whose appearance sparkled like jasper and carnelian. Around the throne was a halo as brilliant as an emerald. 4 Surrounding the throne I saw twenty-four other thrones on which twenty-four elders[d] sat, dressed in white garments and with gold crowns on their heads. 
    5: From the throne came flashes of lightning, rumblings, and peals of thunder. Seven flaming torches burned in front of the throne, which are the seven spirits of God. 
    6: In front of the throne was something that resembled a sea of glass like crystal.
In the center and around the throne, there were four living creatures covered with eyes in front and in back. 
    7: The first creature resembled a lion, the second was like a calf, the third had a face like that of a human being, and the fourth looked like an eagle in flight. 
    8: The four living creatures, each of them with six wings, were covered with eyes inside and out. Day and night they do not stop exclaiming:
“Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God almighty,
    who was, and who is, and who is to come.”

    9: henever the living creatures give glory and honor and thanks to the one who sits on the throne, who lives forever and ever, 
    10: the twenty-four elders fall down before the one who sits on the throne and worship him, who lives forever and ever. They throw down their crowns before the throne, exclaiming:

    11: 
“Worthy are you, Lord our God,
    to receive glory and honor and power,
for you created all things;
    because of your will they came to be and were created.”


End of day 353.