Day 30:

Reading Leviticus, chapters ['25', '26', '27']:

  Chapter 25.

    1: 
    2: 
The Sabbatical Year. 1 The Lord said to Moses on Mount Sinai: 2 Speak to the Israelites and tell them: When you enter the land that I am giving you, let the land, too, keep a sabbath for the Lord. 
    3: For six years you may sow your field, and for six years prune your vineyard, gathering in their produce. 
    4: 
    5: The Sabbatical Year. 1 The Lord said to Moses on Mount Sinai: 2 Speak to the Israelites and tell them: When you enter the land that I am giving you, let the land, too, keep a sabbath for the Lord. 3 For six years you may sow your field, and for six years prune your vineyard, gathering in their produce. 4 But during the seventh year the land shall have a sabbath of complete rest, a sabbath for the Lord, when you may neither sow your field nor prune your vineyard. 5 The aftergrowth of your harvest you shall not reap, nor shall you pick the grapes of your untrimmed vines. It shall be a year of rest for the land. 
    6: While the land has its sabbath, all its produce will be food to eat for you yourself and for your male and female slave, for your laborer and the tenant who live with you, 
    7: and likewise for your livestock and for the wild animals on your land.
The Jubilee Year. 
    8: You shall count seven weeks of years—seven times seven years—such that the seven weeks of years amount to forty-nine years. 
    9: hen, on the tenth day of the seventh month let the ram’s horn resound; on this, the Day of Atonement, the ram’s horn blast shall resound throughout your land. 
    10: You shall treat this fiftieth year as sacred. You shall proclaim liberty in the land for all its inhabitants. It shall be a jubilee for you, when each of you shall return to your own property, each of you to your own family. 
    11: This fiftieth year is your year of jubilee; you shall not sow, nor shall you reap the aftergrowth or pick the untrimmed vines, 
    12: since this is the jubilee. It shall be sacred for you. You may only eat what the field yields of itself.

    13: In this year of jubilee, then, each of you shall return to your own property. 
    14: Therefore, when you sell any land to your neighbor or buy any from your neighbor, do not deal unfairly with one another. 
    15: On the basis of the number of years since the last jubilee you shall purchase the land from your neighbor; and so also, on the basis of the number of years of harvest, that person shall sell it to you. 
    16: When the years are many, the price shall be so much the more; when the years are few, the price shall be so much the less. For it is really the number of harvests that the person sells you. 
    17: Do not deal unfairly with one another, then; but stand in fear of your God. I, the Lord, am your God.

    18: Observe my statutes and be careful to keep my ordinances, so that you will dwell securely in the land. 
    19: The land will yield its fruit and you will eat your fill, and live there securely. 
    20: And if you say, “What shall we eat in the seventh year, if we do not sow or reap our crop?” 
    21: I will command such a blessing for you in the sixth year that there will be crop enough for three years, 
    22: and when you sow in the eighth year, you will still be eating from the old crop; even into the ninth year, until the crop comes in, you will still be eating from the old crop.
Redemption of Property. 
    23: The land shall not be sold irrevocably; for the land is mine, and you are but resident aliens and under my authority. 
    24: 
    25: The Sabbatical Year. 1 The Lord said to Moses on Mount Sinai: 2 Speak to the Israelites and tell them: When you enter the land that I am giving you, let the land, too, keep a sabbath for the Lord. 3 For six years you may sow your field, and for six years prune your vineyard, gathering in their produce. 4 But during the seventh year the land shall have a sabbath of complete rest, a sabbath for the Lord, when you may neither sow your field nor prune your vineyard. 5 The aftergrowth of your harvest you shall not reap, nor shall you pick the grapes of your untrimmed vines. It shall be a year of rest for the land. 6 While the land has its sabbath, all its produce will be food to eat for you yourself and for your male and female slave, for your laborer and the tenant who live with you, 7 and likewise for your livestock and for the wild animals on your land.
The Jubilee Year. 8 [b]You shall count seven weeks of years—seven times seven years—such that the seven weeks of years amount to forty-nine years. 9 Then, on the tenth day of the seventh month[c] let the ram’s horn resound; on this, the Day of Atonement, the ram’s horn blast shall resound throughout your land. 10 You shall treat this fiftieth year as sacred. You shall proclaim liberty in the land for all its inhabitants. It shall be a jubilee for you, when each of you shall return to your own property, each of you to your own family. 11 This fiftieth year is your year of jubilee; you shall not sow, nor shall you reap the aftergrowth or pick the untrimmed vines, 12 since this is the jubilee. It shall be sacred for you. You may only eat what the field yields of itself.
13 In this year of jubilee, then, each of you shall return to your own property. 14 Therefore, when you sell any land to your neighbor or buy any from your neighbor, do not deal unfairly with one another. 15 On the basis of the number of years since the last jubilee you shall purchase the land from your neighbor; and so also, on the basis of the number of years of harvest, that person shall sell it to you. 16 When the years are many, the price shall be so much the more; when the years are few, the price shall be so much the less. For it is really the number of harvests that the person sells you. 17 Do not deal unfairly with one another, then; but stand in fear of your God. I, the Lord, am your God.
18 Observe my statutes and be careful to keep my ordinances, so that you will dwell securely in the land. 19 The land will yield its fruit and you will eat your fill, and live there securely. 20 And if you say, “What shall we eat in the seventh year, if we do not sow or reap our crop?” 21 I will command such a blessing for you in the sixth year that there will be crop enough for three years, 22 and when you sow in the eighth year, you will still be eating from the old crop; even into the ninth year, until the crop comes in, you will still be eating from the old crop.
Redemption of Property.[d] 23 The land shall not be sold irrevocably; for the land is mine, and you are but resident aliens and under my authority. 24 Therefore, in every part of the country that you occupy, you must permit the land to be redeemed. 25 When one of your kindred is reduced to poverty and has to sell some property, that person’s closest relative,[e] who has the duty to redeem it, shall come and redeem what the relative has sold. 
    26: If, however, the person has no relative to redeem it, but later on acquires sufficient means to redeem it, 
    27: the person shall calculate the years since the sale, return the balance to the one to whom it was sold, and thus regain the property. 
    28: But if the person does not acquire sufficient means to buy back the land, what was sold shall remain in the possession of the purchaser until the year of the jubilee, when it must be released and returned to the original owner.

    29: When someone sells a dwelling in a walled town, it can be redeemed up to a full year after its sale—the redemption period is one year. 
    30: But if such a house in a walled town has not been redeemed at the end of a full year, it shall belong irrevocably to the purchaser throughout the generations; it shall not be released in the jubilee. 
    31: However, houses in villages that are not encircled by walls shall be reckoned as part of the surrounding farm land; they may be redeemed, and in the jubilee they must be released.

    32: In levitical cities the Levites shall always have the right to redeem the houses in the cities that are in their possession. 
    33: As for levitical property that goes unredeemed—houses sold in cities of their possession shall be released in the jubilee; for the houses in levitical cities are their possession in the midst of the Israelites. 
    34: Moreover, the pasture land belonging to their cities shall not be sold at all; it must always remain their possession.

    35: When one of your kindred is reduced to poverty and becomes indebted to you, you shall support that person like a resident alien; let your kindred live with you. 
    36: Do not exact interest in advance or accrued interest, but out of fear of God let your kindred live with you. 
    37: Do not give your money at interest or your food at a profit. 
    38: I, the Lord, am your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt to give you the land of Canaan and to be your God.

    39: When your kindred with you, having been so reduced to poverty, sell themselves to you, do not make them work as slaves. 
    40: Rather, let them be like laborers or like your tenants, working with you until the jubilee year, 
    41: when, together with any children, they shall be released from your service and return to their family and to their ancestral property. 
    42: Since they are my servants, whom I brought out of the land of Egypt, they shall not sell themselves as slaves are sold. 
    43: Do not lord it over them harshly, but stand in fear of your God.

    44: The male and female slaves that you possess—these you shall acquire from the nations round about you. 
    45: You may also acquire them from among the resident aliens who reside with you, and from their families who are with you, those whom they bore in your land. These you may possess, 
    46: and bequeath to your children as their hereditary possession forever. You may treat them as slaves. But none of you shall lord it harshly over any of your fellow Israelites.

    47: When your kindred, having been so reduced to poverty, sell themselves to a resident alien who has become wealthy or to descendants of a resident alien’s family, 
    48: even after having sold themselves, they still may be redeemed by one of their kindred, 
    49: by an uncle or cousin, or by some other relative from their family; or, having acquired the means, they may pay the redemption price themselves. 
    50: With the purchaser they shall compute the years from the sale to the jubilee, distributing the sale price over these years as though they had been hired as laborers. 
    51: The more years there are, the more of the sale price they shall pay back as the redemption price; 
    52: the fewer years there are before the jubilee year, the more they have as credit; in proportion to the years of service they shall pay the redemption price. 
    53: The tenant alien shall treat those who sold themselves as laborers hired on an annual basis, and the alien shall not lord it over them harshly before your very eyes. 
    54: And if they are not redeemed by these means, they shall nevertheless be released, together with any children, in the jubilee year. 
    55: For the Israelites belong to me as servants; they are my servants, whom I brought out of the land of Egypt, I, the Lord, your God.


  Chapter 26.

    1: 
    2: 
The Reward of Obedience. 1 Do not make idols for yourselves. You shall not erect a carved image or a sacred stone for yourselves, nor shall you set up a carved stone for worship in your land; for I, the Lord, am your God. 2 Keep my sabbaths, and reverence my sanctuary. I am the Lord.

    3: If you live in accordance with my statutes and are careful to observe my commandments, 
    4: I will give you your rains in due season, so that the land will yield its crops, and the trees their fruit; 
    5: 
    6: The Reward of Obedience. 1 Do not make idols for yourselves. You shall not erect a carved image or a sacred stone for yourselves, nor shall you set up a carved stone for worship in your land; for I, the Lord, am your God. 2 Keep my sabbaths, and reverence my sanctuary. I am the Lord.
3 [b]If you live in accordance with my statutes and are careful to observe my commandments, 4 I will give you your rains in due season, so that the land will yield its crops, and the trees their fruit; 5 your threshing will last till vintage time, and your vintage till the time for sowing, and you will eat your fill of food, and live securely in your land. 6 I will establish peace in the land, and you will lie down to rest with no one to cause you anxiety. I will rid the country of ravenous beasts, and no sword shall sweep across your land. 
    7: You will rout your enemies, and they shall fall before your sword. 
    8: Five of you will put a hundred of your foes to flight, and a hundred of you will put to flight ten thousand, till your enemies fall before your sword. 
    9:  will look with favor upon you, and make you fruitful and numerous, as I carry out my covenant with you. 
    10: You shall eat the oldest stored harvest, and have to discard it to make room for the new. 
    11: I will set my tabernacle in your midst, and will not loathe you. 
    12: Ever present in your midst, I will be your God, and you will be my people; 
    13: I, the Lord, am your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt to be their slaves no more, breaking the bars of your yoke and making you walk erect.
The Punishment of Disobedience. 
    14: But if you do not heed me and do not keep all these commandments, 
    15: if you reject my statutes and loathe my decrees, refusing to obey all my commandments and breaking my covenant, 
    16: then I, in turn, will do this to you: I will bring terror upon you—with consumption and fever to dim the eyes and sap the life. You will sow your seed in vain, for your enemies will consume the crop. 
    17: I will turn against you, and you will be beaten down before your enemies and your foes will lord it over you. You will flee though no one pursues you.

    18: If even after this you do not obey me, I will increase the chastisement for your sins sevenfold, 
    19: to break your proud strength. I will make the sky above you as hard as iron, and your soil as hard as bronze, 
    20: so that your strength will be spent in vain; your land will bear no crops, and its trees no fruit.

    21: If then you continue hostile, unwilling to obey me, I will multiply my blows sevenfold, as your sins deserve. 
    22: I will unleash wild beasts against you, to rob you of your children and wipe out your livestock, till your population dwindles away and your roads become deserted.

    23: If, with all this, you still do not accept my discipline and continue hostile to me, 
    24: I, too, will continue to be hostile to you and I, for my part, will smite you for your sins sevenfold. 
    25: 
    26: The Reward of Obedience. 1 Do not make idols for yourselves. You shall not erect a carved image or a sacred stone for yourselves, nor shall you set up a carved stone for worship in your land; for I, the Lord, am your God. 2 Keep my sabbaths, and reverence my sanctuary. I am the Lord.
3 [b]If you live in accordance with my statutes and are careful to observe my commandments, 4 I will give you your rains in due season, so that the land will yield its crops, and the trees their fruit; 5 your threshing will last till vintage time, and your vintage till the time for sowing, and you will eat your fill of food, and live securely in your land. 6 I will establish peace in the land, and you will lie down to rest with no one to cause you anxiety. I will rid the country of ravenous beasts, and no sword shall sweep across your land. 7 You will rout your enemies, and they shall fall before your sword. 8 Five of you will put a hundred of your foes to flight, and a hundred of you will put to flight ten thousand, till your enemies fall before your sword. 9 I will look with favor upon you, and make you fruitful and numerous, as I carry out my covenant with you. 10 You shall eat the oldest stored harvest, and have to discard it to make room for the new. 11 I will set my tabernacle in your midst, and will not loathe you. 12 Ever present in your midst, I will be your God, and you will be my people; 13 I, the Lord, am your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt to be their slaves no more, breaking the bars of your yoke and making you walk erect.
The Punishment of Disobedience.[c] 14 But if you do not heed me and do not keep all these commandments, 15 if you reject my statutes and loathe my decrees, refusing to obey all my commandments and breaking my covenant, 16 then I, in turn, will do this to you: I will bring terror upon you—with consumption and fever to dim the eyes and sap the life. You will sow your seed in vain, for your enemies will consume the crop. 17 I will turn against you, and you will be beaten down before your enemies and your foes will lord it over you. You will flee though no one pursues you.
18 If even after this you do not obey me, I will increase the chastisement for your sins sevenfold, 19 to break your proud strength. I will make the sky above you as hard as iron, and your soil as hard as bronze, 20 so that your strength will be spent in vain; your land will bear no crops, and its trees no fruit.
21 If then you continue hostile, unwilling to obey me, I will multiply my blows sevenfold, as your sins deserve. 22 I will unleash wild beasts against you, to rob you of your children and wipe out your livestock, till your population dwindles away and your roads become deserted.
23 If, with all this, you still do not accept my discipline and continue hostile to me, 24 I, too, will continue to be hostile to you and I, for my part, will smite you for your sins sevenfold. 25 I will bring against you the sword, the avenger of my covenant. Though you then huddle together in your cities, I will send pestilence among you, till you are delivered to the enemy. 26 When I break your staff of bread, ten women will need but one oven for baking your bread, and they shall dole it out to you by weight; and though you eat, you shall not be satisfied.

    27: If, despite all this, you disobey and continue hostile to me, 
    28: I will continue in my hostile rage toward you, and I myself will discipline you for your sins sevenfold, 
    29: till you begin to eat the flesh of your own sons and daughters. 
    30: I will demolish your high places, overthrow your incense stands, and cast your corpses upon the corpses of your idols. In my loathing of you, 
    31: I will lay waste your cities and desolate your sanctuaries, refusing your sweet-smelling offerings. 
    32: So devastated will I leave the land that your enemies who come to live there will stand aghast at the sight of it. 
    33: And you I will scatter among the nations at the point of my drawn sword, leaving your countryside desolate and your cities deserted. 
    34: Then shall the land, during the time it lies waste, make up its lost sabbaths, while you are in the land of your enemies; then shall the land have rest and make up for its sabbaths 
    35: during all the time that it lies desolate, enjoying the rest that you would not let it have on your sabbaths when you lived there.

    36: Those of you who survive in the lands of their enemies, I will make so fainthearted that the sound of a driven leaf will pursue them, and they shall run as if from the sword, and fall though no one pursues them; 
    37: stumbling over one another as if to escape a sword, while no one is after them—so helpless will you be to take a stand against your foes! 
    38: You shall perish among the nations, swallowed up in your enemies’ country. 
    39: Those of you who survive will waste away in the lands of their enemies, for their own and their ancestors’ guilt.

    40: They will confess their iniquity and the iniquity of their ancestors in their treachery against me and in their continued hostility toward me, 
    41: so that I, too, had to be hostile to them and bring them into their enemies’ land. Then, when their uncircumcised hearts are humbled and they make amends for their iniquity, 
    42: I will remember my covenant with Jacob, and also my covenant with Isaac; and also my covenant with Abraham I will remember. The land, too, I will remember. 
    43: The land will be forsaken by them, that in its desolation without them, it may make up its sabbaths, and that they, too, may make good the debt of their guilt for having spurned my decrees and loathed my statutes. 
    44: Yet even so, even while they are in their enemies’ land, I will not reject or loathe them to the point of wiping them out, thus making void my covenant with them; for I, the Lord, am their God. 
    45: I will remember for them the covenant I made with their forebears, whom I brought out of the land of Egypt before the eyes of the nations, that I might be their God. I am the Lord.

    46: These are the statutes, decrees and laws which the Lord established between himself and the Israelites through Moses on Mount Sinai.


  Chapter 27.

    1: 
    2: 
Votive Offerings and Dedications. 1 The Lord said to Moses: 2 Speak to the Israelites and tell them: When anyone makes a vow to the Lord with respect to the value of a human being, 
    3: the value for males between the ages of twenty and sixty shall be fifty silver shekels, by the sanctuary shekel; 
    4: and for a female, the value shall be thirty shekels. 
    5: For persons between the ages of five and twenty, the value for a male shall be twenty shekels, and for a female, ten shekels. 
    6: 
    7: Votive Offerings and Dedications. 1 The Lord said to Moses: 2 Speak to the Israelites and tell them: When anyone makes a vow to the Lord with respect to the value of a human being, 3 the value for males between the ages of twenty and sixty shall be fifty silver shekels, by the sanctuary shekel; 4 and for a female, the value shall be thirty shekels. 5 For persons between the ages of five and twenty, the value for a male shall be twenty shekels, and for a female, ten shekels. 6 For persons between the ages of one month and five years, the value for a male shall be five silver shekels, and for a female, three shekels. 7 For persons of sixty or more, for a male the value shall be fifteen shekels, and ten shekels for a female. 
    8: However, if the one who made the vow is too poor to meet the sum, the person must be set before the priest, who shall determine a value; the priest will do this in keeping with the means of the one who made the vow.

    9: f the offering vowed to the Lord is an animal that may be sacrificed, every such animal given to the Lord becomes sacred. 
    10: The offerer shall not substitute or exchange another for it, either a worse or a better one. If the offerer exchanges one animal in place of another, both the original and its substitute shall become sacred. 
    11: If any unclean animal which is unfit for sacrifice to the Lord is vowed, it must be set before the priest, 
    12: who shall determine its value in keeping with its good or bad qualities, and the value set by the priest shall stand. 
    13: If the offerer wishes to redeem the animal, the person shall pay one fifth more than this valuation.

    14: When someone dedicates a house as sacred to the Lord,[d] the priest shall determine its value in keeping with its good or bad qualities, and the value set by the priest shall stand. 
    15: A person dedicating a house who then wishes to redeem it shall pay one fifth more than the price thus established, and then it will again belong to that individual.

    16: If someone dedicates to the Lord a portion of hereditary land, its valuation shall be made according to the amount of seed required to sow it, the acreage sown with a homer of barley seed being valued at fifty silver shekels. 
    17: If the dedication of a field is made at the beginning of a jubilee period, the full valuation shall hold; 
    18: but if it is some time after this, the priest shall estimate its money value according to the number of years left until the next jubilee year, with a corresponding reduction on the valuation. 
    19: A person dedicating a field who then wishes to redeem it shall pay one fifth more than the price thus established, and so reclaim it. 
    20: If, instead of redeeming such a field, one sells it to another, it may no longer be redeemed; 
    21: but at the jubilee it shall be released as sacred to the Lord; like a field that is put under the ban, it shall become priestly property.

    22: If someone dedicates to the Lord a field that was purchased and was not part of hereditary property, 
    23: the priest shall compute its value in proportion to the number of years until the next jubilee, and on the same day the person shall pay the price thus established, a sacred donation to the Lord; 
    24: at the jubilee the field shall revert to the hereditary owner of this land from whom it had been purchased.

    25: Every valuation shall be made according to the standard of the sanctuary shekel. There are twenty gerahs to the shekel.
Irredeemable Offerings. 
    26: 
    27: Votive Offerings and Dedications. 1 The Lord said to Moses: 2 Speak to the Israelites and tell them: When anyone makes a vow to the Lord with respect to the value of a human being, 3 the value for males between the ages of twenty and sixty shall be fifty silver shekels, by the sanctuary shekel; 4 and for a female, the value shall be thirty shekels. 5 For persons between the ages of five and twenty, the value for a male shall be twenty shekels, and for a female, ten shekels. 6 For persons between the ages of one month and five years, the value for a male shall be five silver shekels, and for a female, three shekels. 7 For persons of sixty or more, for a male the value shall be fifteen shekels, and ten shekels for a female. 8 However, if the one who made the vow is too poor to meet the sum, the person must be set before the priest, who shall determine a value; the priest will do this in keeping with the means of the one who made the vow.
9 If the offering vowed to the Lord is an animal that may be sacrificed, every such animal given to the Lord becomes sacred. 10 The offerer shall not substitute or exchange another for it, either a worse or a better one. If the offerer exchanges one animal in place of another, both the original and its substitute shall become sacred. 11 If any unclean animal which is unfit for sacrifice to the Lord is vowed, it must be set before the priest, 12 who shall determine its value[b] in keeping with its good or bad qualities, and the value set by the priest shall stand. 13 If the offerer wishes to redeem the animal, the person shall pay one fifth more than this valuation.
14 [c]When someone dedicates a house as sacred to the Lord,[d] the priest shall determine its value in keeping with its good or bad qualities, and the value set by the priest shall stand. 15 A person dedicating a house who then wishes to redeem it shall pay one fifth more than the price thus established, and then it will again belong to that individual.
16 If someone dedicates to the Lord a portion of hereditary land, its valuation shall be made according to the amount of seed required to sow it, the acreage sown with a homer[e] of barley seed being valued at fifty silver shekels. 17 If the dedication of a field is made at the beginning of a jubilee period, the full valuation shall hold; 18 but if it is some time after this, the priest shall estimate its money value according to the number of years left until the next jubilee year, with a corresponding reduction on the valuation. 19 A person dedicating a field who then wishes to redeem[f] it shall pay one fifth more than the price thus established, and so reclaim it. 20 If, instead of redeeming such a field, one sells it[g] to another, it may no longer be redeemed; 21 but at the jubilee it shall be released as sacred[h] to the Lord; like a field that is put under the ban, it shall become priestly property.
22 If someone dedicates to the Lord a field that was purchased and was not part of hereditary property, 23 the priest shall compute its value in proportion to the number of years until the next jubilee, and on the same day the person shall pay the price thus established, a sacred donation to the Lord; 24 at the jubilee the field shall revert to the hereditary owner of this land from whom it had been purchased.[i]
25 Every valuation shall be made according to the standard of the sanctuary shekel. There are twenty gerahs to the shekel.
Irredeemable Offerings. 26 [j]Note that a firstborn animal, which as such already belongs to the Lord, may not be dedicated. Whether an ox or a sheep, it is the Lord’s. 27 But if it is an unclean animal,[k] it may be redeemed by paying one fifth more than its value. If it is not redeemed, it shall be sold at its value.

    28: Note, also, that any possession which someone puts under the ban for the Lord, whether it is a human being, an animal, or a hereditary field, shall be neither sold nor redeemed; everything that is put under the ban becomes most holy to the Lord. 
    29: All human beings that are put under the ban cannot be redeemed; they must be put to death.

    30: All tithes of the land, whether in grain from the fields or in fruit from the trees, belong to the Lord; they are sacred to the Lord. 
    31: If someone wishes to redeem any of the tithes, the person shall pay one fifth more than their value. 
    32: The tithes of the herd and the flock, every tenth animal that passes under the herdsman’s rod, shall be sacred to the Lord. 
    33: It shall not matter whether good ones or bad ones are thus chosen, and no exchange may be made. If any exchange is made, both the original animal and its substitute become sacred and cannot be redeemed.

    34: These are the commandments which the Lord gave Moses on Mount Sinai for the Israelites.


End of day 30.