Day 41:

Reading Deuteronomy, chapters ['5', '6', '7', '8']:

  Chapter 5.

    1: Moses summoned all Israel and said to them, Hear, O Israel, the statutes and ordinances which I proclaim in your hearing this day, that you may learn them and take care to observe them. 
    2: The Lord, our God, made a covenant with us at Horeb; 
    3: not with our ancestors did the Lord make this covenant, but with us, all of us who are alive here this day. 
    4: 
    5: The Covenant at Horeb. 1 Moses summoned all Israel and said to them, Hear, O Israel, the statutes and ordinances which I proclaim in your hearing this day, that you may learn them and take care to observe them. 2 The Lord, our God, made a covenant with us at Horeb; 3 not with our ancestors did the Lord make this covenant, but with us, all of us who are alive here this day. 4 Face to face, the Lord spoke with you on the mountain from the midst of the fire, 5 while I was standing between the Lord and you at that time, to announce to you these words of the Lord, since you were afraid of the fire and would not go up the mountain:
The Decalogue. 
    6: I am the Lord your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery. 
    7: You shall not have other gods beside me. 
    8: You shall not make for yourself an idol or a likeness of anything in the heavens above or on the earth below or in the waters beneath the earth; 
    9: b]you shall not bow down before them or serve them. For I, the Lord, your God, am a jealous[c] God, bringing punishment for their parents’ wickedness on the children of those who hate me, down to the third and fourth generation, 
    10: but showing love down to the thousandth generation of those who love me and keep my commandments.

    11: You shall not invoke the name of the Lord, your God, in vain. For the Lord will not leave unpunished anyone who invokes his name in vain.

    12: Observe the sabbath day—keep it holy, as the Lord, your God, commanded you. 
    13: Six days you may labor and do all your work, 
    14: but the seventh day is a sabbath of the Lord your God. You shall not do any work, either you, your son or your daughter, your male or female slave, your ox or donkey or any work animal, or the resident alien within your gates, so that your male and female slave may rest as you do. 
    15: Remember that you too were once slaves in the land of Egypt, and the Lord, your God, brought you out from there with a strong hand and outstretched arm. That is why the Lord, your God, has commanded you to observe the sabbath day.

    16: Honor your father and your mother, as the Lord, your God, has commanded you, that you may have a long life and that you may prosper in the land the Lord your God is giving you.

    17: You shall not kill.

    18: You shall not commit adultery.

    19: You shall not steal.

    20: You shall not bear dishonest witness against your neighbor.

    21: You shall not covet your neighbor’s wife.
You shall not desire your neighbor’s house or field, his male or female slave, his ox or donkey, or anything that belongs to your neighbor.
Moses as Mediator. 
    22: These words the Lord spoke with a loud voice to your entire assembly on the mountain from the midst of the fire and the dense black cloud, and added no more. He inscribed them on two stone tablets and gave them to me. 
    23: But when you heard the voice from the midst of the darkness, while the mountain was ablaze with fire, you came near to me, all your tribal heads and elders, 
    24: and said, “The Lord, our God, has indeed let us see his glory and his greatness, and we have heard his voice from the midst of the fire. Today we have found out that God may speak to a mortal and that person may still live. 
    25: Now, why should we die? For this great fire will consume us. If we hear the voice of the Lord, our God, any more, we shall die. 
    26: For what mortal has heard the voice of the living God speaking from the midst of fire, as we have, and lived? 
    27: You go closer and listen to all that the Lord, our God, will say, and then tell us what the Lord, our God, tells you; we will listen and obey.”

    28: The Lord heard your words as you were speaking to me and said to me, I have heard the words these people have spoken to you, which are all well said. 
    29: Would that they might always be of such a mind, to fear me and to keep all my commandments! Then they and their descendants would prosper forever. 
    30: Go, tell them: Return to your tents. 
    31: Then you stand here near me and I will give you all the commandments, the statutes and the ordinances; you must teach them, that they may observe them in the land I am giving them to possess.

    32: Be careful, therefore, to do as the Lord, your God, has commanded you, not turning aside to the right or to the left, 
    33: but following exactly the way that the Lord, your God, commanded you that you may live and prosper, and may have long life in the land which you are to possess.


  Chapter 6.

    1: This then is the commandment, the statutes and the ordinances, which the Lord, your God, has commanded that you be taught to observe in the land you are about to cross into to possess, 
    2: so that you, that is, you, your child, and your grandchild, may fear the Lord, your God, by keeping, as long as you live, all his statutes and commandments which I enjoin on you, and thus have long life. 
    3: Hear then, Israel, and be careful to observe them, that it may go well with you and that you may increase greatly; for the Lord, the God of your ancestors, promised you a land flowing with milk and honey.
The Great Commandment. 
    4: Hear, O Israel! The Lord is our God, the Lord alone! 
    5: 
    6: 1 This then is the commandment, the statutes and the ordinances, which the Lord, your God, has commanded that you be taught to observe in the land you are about to cross into to possess, 2 so that you, that is, you, your child, and your grandchild, may fear the Lord, your God, by keeping, as long as you live, all his statutes and commandments which I enjoin on you, and thus have long life. 3 Hear then, Israel, and be careful to observe them, that it may go well with you and that you may increase greatly; for the Lord, the God of your ancestors, promised you a land flowing with milk and honey.
The Great Commandment. 4 Hear, O Israel![b] The Lord is our God, the Lord alone! 5 Therefore, you shall love the Lord, your God, with your whole heart, and with your whole being, and with your whole strength. 6 Take to heart these words which I command you today. 
    7: Keep repeating them to your children. Recite them when you are at home and when you are away, when you lie down and when you get up. 
    8: Bind them on your arm as a sign and let them be as a pendant on your forehead. 
    9: rite them on the doorposts of your houses and on your gates.
Fidelity in Prosperity. 
    10: When the Lord, your God, brings you into the land which he swore to your ancestors, to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, that he would give you, a land with fine, large cities that you did not build, 
    11: with houses full of goods of all sorts that you did not garner, with cisterns that you did not dig, with vineyards and olive groves that you did not plant; and when, therefore, you eat and are satisfied, 
    12: be careful not to forget the Lord, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, that house of slavery. 
    13: The Lord, your God, shall you fear; him shall you serve, and by his name shall you swear. 
    14: You shall not go after other gods, any of the gods of the surrounding peoples— 
    15: for the Lord, your God who is in your midst, is a passionate God—lest the anger of the Lord, your God, flare up against you and he destroy you from upon the land.

    16: You shall not put the Lord, your God, to the test, as you did at Massah. 
    17: But keep the commandments of the Lord, your God, and the decrees and the statutes he has commanded you. 
    18: Do what is right and good in the sight of the Lord, that it may go well with you, and you may enter in and possess the good land which the Lord promised on oath to your ancestors, 
    19: driving all your enemies out of your way, as the Lord has promised.
Instruction to Children. 
    20: Later on, when your son asks you, “What do these decrees and statutes and ordinances mean?” which the Lord, our God, has enjoined on you, 
    21: you shall say to your son, “We were once slaves of Pharaoh in Egypt, but the Lord brought us out of Egypt with a strong hand 
    22: and wrought before our eyes signs and wonders, great and dire, against Egypt and against Pharaoh and his whole house. 
    23: He brought us from there to bring us in and give us the land he had promised on oath to our ancestors. 
    24: The Lord commanded us to observe all these statutes in fear of the Lord, our God, that we may always have as good a life as we have today. 
    25: This is our justice before the Lord, our God: to observe carefully this whole commandment he has enjoined on us.”


  Chapter 7.

    1: When the Lord, your God, brings you into the land which you are about to enter to possess, and removes many nations before you—the Hittites, Girgashites, Amorites, Canaanites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites, seven nations more numerous and powerful than you— 
    2: and when the Lord, your God, gives them over to you and you defeat them, you shall put them under the ban. Make no covenant with them and do not be gracious to them. 
    3: You shall not intermarry with them, neither giving your daughters to their sons nor taking their daughters for your sons. 
    4: For they would turn your sons from following me to serving other gods, and then the anger of the Lord would flare up against you and he would quickly destroy you.

    5: But this is how you must deal with them: Tear down their altars, smash their sacred pillars, chop down their asherahs, and destroy their idols by fire. 
    6: 
    7: Destruction of the Nations in the Land. 1 When the Lord, your God, brings you into the land which you are about to enter to possess, and removes many nations before you—the Hittites, Girgashites, Amorites, Canaanites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites, seven nations more numerous and powerful than you— 2 and when the Lord, your God, gives them over to you and you defeat them, you shall put them under the ban. Make no covenant with them and do not be gracious to them. 3 You shall not intermarry with them, neither giving your daughters to their sons nor taking their daughters for your sons. 4 For they would turn your sons from following me to serving other gods, and then the anger of the Lord would flare up against you and he would quickly destroy you.
5 But this is how you must deal with them: Tear down their altars, smash their sacred pillars, chop down their asherahs, and destroy their idols by fire. 6 For you are a people holy to the Lord, your God; the Lord, your God, has chosen you from all the peoples on the face of the earth to be a people specially his own. 7 It was not because you are more numerous than all the peoples that the Lord set his heart on you and chose you; for you are really the smallest of all peoples. 
    8: It was because the Lord loved you and because of his fidelity to the oath he had sworn to your ancestors, that the Lord brought you out with a strong hand and redeemed you from the house of slavery, from the hand of Pharaoh, king of Egypt. 
    9: now, then, that the Lord, your God, is God: the faithful God who keeps covenant mercy to the thousandth generation toward those who love him and keep his commandments, 
    10: but who repays with destruction those who hate him; he does not delay with those who hate him, but makes them pay for it. 
    11: Therefore carefully observe the commandment, the statutes and the ordinances which I command you today.
Blessings of Obedience. 
    12: As your reward for heeding these ordinances and keeping them carefully, the Lord, your God, will keep with you the covenant mercy he promised on oath to your ancestors. 
    13: He will love and bless and multiply you; he will bless the fruit of your womb and the produce of your soil, your grain and wine and oil, the young of your herds and the offspring of your flocks, in the land which he swore to your ancestors he would give you. 
    14: You will be blessed above all peoples; no man or woman among you shall be childless nor shall your livestock be barren. 
    15: The Lord will remove all sickness from you; he will not afflict you with any of the malignant diseases that you know from Egypt, but will leave them with all those who hate you.

    16: You shall consume all the peoples which the Lord, your God, is giving over to you. You are not to look on them with pity, nor serve their gods, for that would be a snare to you. 
    17: If you say to yourselves, “These nations are more numerous than we. How can we dispossess them?” 
    18: do not be afraid of them. Rather, remember clearly what the Lord, your God, did to Pharaoh and to all Egypt: 
    19: the great testings which your own eyes have seen, the signs and wonders, the strong hand and outstretched arm with which the Lord, your God, brought you out. The same also will he do to all the peoples of whom you are now afraid. 
    20: Moreover, the Lord, your God, will send hornets among them, until those who are left and those who are hiding from you are destroyed. 
    21: Therefore, do not be terrified by them, for the Lord, your God, who is in your midst, is a great and awesome God. 
    22: He will remove these nations before you little by little. You cannot finish with them quickly, lest the wild beasts become too numerous for you. 
    23: The Lord, your God, will give them over to you and throw them into utter panic until they are destroyed. 
    24: He will deliver their kings into your power, that you may make their names perish from under the heavens. No one will be able to stand up against you, till you have destroyed them. 
    25: The images of their gods you shall destroy by fire. Do not covet the silver or gold on them, nor take it for yourselves, lest you be ensnared by it; for it is an abomination to the Lord, your God. 
    26: You shall not bring any abominable thing into your house, so as to be, like it, under the ban; loathe and abhor it utterly for it is under the ban.


  Chapter 8.

    1: Be careful to observe this whole commandment that I enjoin on you today, that you may live and increase, and may enter in and possess the land which the Lord promised on oath to your ancestors. 
    2: Remember how for these forty years the Lord, your God, has directed all your journeying in the wilderness, so as to test you by affliction, to know what was in your heart: to keep his commandments, or not. 
    3: He therefore let you be afflicted with hunger, and then fed you with manna, a food unknown to you and your ancestors, so you might know that it is not by bread alone that people live, but by all that comes forth from the mouth of the Lord. 
    4: The clothing did not fall from you in tatters, nor did your feet swell these forty years. 
    5: So you must know in your heart that, even as a man disciplines his son, so the Lord, your God, disciplines you. 
    6: Therefore, keep the commandments of the Lord, your God, by walking in his ways and fearing him.
Cautions About Prosperity. 
    7: 
    8: God’s Care. 1 Be careful to observe this whole commandment that I enjoin on you today, that you may live and increase, and may enter in and possess the land which the Lord promised on oath to your ancestors. 2 Remember how for these forty years the Lord, your God, has directed all your journeying in the wilderness, so as to test you by affliction, to know what was in your heart: to keep his commandments, or not. 3 He therefore let you be afflicted with hunger, and then fed you with manna, a food unknown to you and your ancestors, so you might know that it is not by bread alone that people live, but by all that comes forth from the mouth of the Lord. 4 The clothing did not fall from you in tatters, nor did your feet swell these forty years. 5 So you must know in your heart that, even as a man disciplines his son, so the Lord, your God, disciplines you. 6 Therefore, keep the commandments of the Lord, your God, by walking in his ways and fearing him.
Cautions About Prosperity. 7 For the Lord, your God, is bringing you into a good country, a land with streams of water, with springs and fountains welling up in the hills and valleys, 8 a land of wheat and barley, of vines and fig trees and pomegranates, of olive trees and of honey, 
    9:  land where you will always have bread and where you will lack nothing, a land whose stones contain iron and in whose hills you can mine copper. 
    10: But when you have eaten and are satisfied, you must bless the Lord, your God, for the good land he has given you. 
    11: Be careful not to forget the Lord, your God, by failing to keep his commandments and ordinances and statutes which I enjoin on you today: 
    12: lest, when you have eaten and are satisfied, and have built fine houses and lived in them, 
    13: and your herds and flocks have increased, your silver and gold has increased, and all your property has increased, 
    14: you then become haughty of heart and forget the Lord, your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, that house of slavery; 
    15: he guided you through the vast and terrible wilderness with its saraph serpents and scorpions, its parched and waterless ground; he brought forth water for you from the flinty rock 
    16: and fed you in the wilderness with manna, a food unknown to your ancestors, that he might afflict you and test you, but also make you prosperous in the end. 
    17: Otherwise, you might say in your heart, “It is my own power and the strength of my own hand that has got me this wealth.” 
    18: Remember then the Lord, your God, for he is the one who gives you the power to get wealth, by fulfilling, as he has now done, the covenant he swore to your ancestors. 
    19: But if you do forget the Lord, your God, and go after other gods, serving and bowing down to them, I bear witness to you this day that you will perish utterly. 
    20: Like the nations which the Lord destroys before you, so shall you too perish for not listening to the voice of the Lord, your God.


End of day 41.