Day 313:

Reading Romans, chapters ['1', '2', '3', '4']:

  Chapter 1.

    1: Greeting. 1 Paul, a slave of Christ Jesus,[b] called to be an apostle and set apart for the gospel of God, 
    2: which he promised previously through his prophets in the holy scriptures, 
    3: the gospel about his Son, descended from David according to the flesh, 
    4: but established as Son of God in power according to the spirit of holiness through resurrection from the dead, Jesus Christ our Lord. 
    5: Through him we have received the grace of apostleship, to bring about the obedience of faith, for the sake of his name, among all the Gentiles, 
    6: among whom are you also, who are called to belong to Jesus Christ; 
    7: to all the beloved of God in Rome, called to be holy. Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Thanksgiving. 
    8: First, I give thanks to my God through Jesus Christ for all of you, because your faith is heralded throughout the world. 
    9: od is my witness, whom I serve with my spirit in proclaiming the gospel of his Son, that I remember you constantly, 
    10: always asking in my prayers that somehow by God’s will I may at last find my way clear to come to you. 
    11: For I long to see you, that I may share with you some spiritual gift so that you may be strengthened, 
    12: that is, that you and I may be mutually encouraged by one another’s faith, yours and mine. 
    13: I do not want you to be unaware, brothers, that I often planned to come to you, though I was prevented until now, that I might harvest some fruit among you, too, as among the rest of the Gentiles. 
    14: To Greeks and non-Greeks alike, to the wise and the ignorant, I am under obligation; 
    15: that is why I am eager to preach the gospel also to you in Rome.
II. Humanity Lost Without the Gospel
God’s Power for Salvation. 
    16: For I am not ashamed of the gospel. It is the power of God for the salvation of everyone who believes: for Jew first, and then Greek. 
    17: For in it is revealed the righteousness of God from faith to faith; as it is written, “The one who is righteous by faith will live.”
Punishment of Idolaters. 
    18: The wrath[m] of God[n] is indeed being revealed from heaven against every impiety and wickedness of those who suppress the truth by their wickedness. 
    19: For what can be known about God is evident to them, because God made it evident to them. 
    20: Ever since the creation of the world, his invisible attributes of eternal power and divinity have been able to be understood and perceived in what he has made. As a result, they have no excuse; 
    21: for although they knew God they did not accord him glory as God or give him thanks. Instead, they became vain in their reasoning, and their senseless minds were darkened. 
    22: While claiming to be wise, they became fools 
    23: and exchanged the glory of the immortal God for the likeness of an image of mortal man or of birds or of four-legged animals or of snakes.

    24: Therefore, God handed them over to impurity through the lusts of their hearts for the mutual degradation of their bodies. 
    25: They exchanged the truth of God for a lie and revered and worshiped the creature rather than the creator, who is blessed forever. Amen. 
    26: Therefore, God handed them over to degrading passions. Their females exchanged natural relations for unnatural, 
    27: and the males likewise gave up natural relations with females and burned with lust for one another. Males did shameful things with males and thus received in their own persons the due penalty for their perversity. 
    28: And since they did not see fit to acknowledge God, God handed them over to their undiscerning mind to do what is improper. 
    29: They are filled with every form of wickedness, evil, greed, and malice; full of envy, murder, rivalry, treachery, and spite. They are gossips 
    30: and scandalmongers and they hate God. They are insolent, haughty, boastful, ingenious in their wickedness, and rebellious toward their parents. 
    31: They are senseless, faithless, heartless, ruthless. 
    32: Although they know the just decree of God that all who practice such things deserve death, they not only do them but give approval to those who practice them.


  Chapter 2.

    1: 
    2: God’s Just Judgment. 1 Therefore, you are without excuse, every one of you who passes judgment.[b] For by the standard by which you judge another you condemn yourself, since you, the judge, do the very same things. 2 We know that the judgment of God on those who do such things is true. 
    3: Do you suppose, then, you who judge those who engage in such things and yet do them yourself, that you will escape the judgment of God? 
    4: Or do you hold his priceless kindness, forbearance, and patience in low esteem, unaware that the kindness of God would lead you to repentance? 
    5: By your stubbornness and impenitent heart, you are storing up wrath for yourself for the day of wrath and revelation of the just judgment of God, 
    6: who will repay everyone according to his works: 
    7: eternal life to those who seek glory, honor, and immortality through perseverance in good works, 
    8: but wrath and fury to those who selfishly disobey the truth and obey wickedness. 
    9: es, affliction and distress will come upon every human being who does evil, Jew first and then Greek. 
    10: But there will be glory, honor, and peace for everyone who does good, Jew first and then Greek. 
    11: There is no partiality with God.
Judgment by the Interior Law.[e] 
    12: All who sin outside the law will also perish without reference to it, and all who sin under the law will be judged in accordance with it. 
    13: For it is not those who hear the law who are just in the sight of God; rather, those who observe the law will be justified. 
    14: For when the Gentiles who do not have the law by nature observe the prescriptions of the law, they are a law for themselves even though they do not have the law. 
    15: They show that the demands of the law are written in their hearts, while their conscience also bears witness and their conflicting thoughts accuse or even defend them 
    16: on the day when, according to my gospel, God will judge people’s hidden works through Christ Jesus.
Judgment by the Mosaic Law. 
    17: Now if you call yourself a Jew and rely on the law and boast of God 
    18: and know his will and are able to discern what is important since you are instructed from the law, 
    19: and if you are confident that you are a guide for the blind and a light for those in darkness, 
    20: that you are a trainer of the foolish and teacher of the simple, because in the law you have the formulation of knowledge and truth— 
    21: then you who teach another, are you failing to teach yourself? You who preach against stealing, do you steal? 
    22: You who forbid adultery, do you commit adultery? You who detest idols, do you rob temples? 
    23: You who boast of the law, do you dishonor God by breaking the law? 
    24: For, as it is written, “Because of you the name of God is reviled among the Gentiles.”

    25: Circumcision, to be sure, has value if you observe the law; but if you break the law, your circumcision has become uncircumcision. 
    26: Again, if an uncircumcised man keeps the precepts of the law, will he not be considered circumcised? 
    27: Indeed, those who are physically uncircumcised but carry out the law will pass judgment on you, with your written law and circumcision, who break the law. 
    28: One is not a Jew outwardly. True circumcision is not outward, in the flesh. 
    29: Rather, one is a Jew inwardly, and circumcision is of the heart, in the spirit, not the letter; his praise is not from human beings but from God.


  Chapter 3.

    1: What advantage is there then in being a Jew? Or what is the value of circumcision? 
    2: 
    3: Answers to Objections. 1 What advantage is there then in being a Jew? Or what is the value of circumcision? 2 Much, in every respect. [For] in the first place, they were entrusted with the utterances of God. 3 What if some were unfaithful? Will their infidelity nullify the fidelity of God? 
    4: Of course not! God must be true, though every human being is a liar, as it is written:
“That you may be justified in your words,
    and conquer when you are judged.”

    5: But if our wickedness provides proof of God’s righteousness, what can we say? Is God unjust, humanly speaking, to inflict his wrath? 
    6: Of course not! For how else is God to judge the world? 
    7: But if God’s truth redounds to his glory through my falsehood, why am I still being condemned as a sinner? 
    8: And why not say—as we are accused and as some claim we say—that we should do evil that good may come of it? Their penalty is what they deserve.
Universal Bondage to Sin. 
    9: ell, then, are we better off? Not entirely, for we have already brought the charge against Jews and Greeks alike that they are all under the domination of sin, 
    10: as it is written:
“There is no one just, not one,

    11: 
    there is no one who understands,
        there is no one who seeks God.

    12: 
All have gone astray; all alike are worthless;
    there is not one who does good,
         even one.

    13: 
Their throats are open graves;
    they deceive with their tongues;
the venom of asps is on their lips;

    14: 
    their mouths are full of bitter cursing.

    15: 
Their feet are quick to shed blood;

    16: 
    ruin and misery are in their ways,

    17: 
and the way of peace they know not.

    18: 
    There is no fear of God before their eyes.”

    19: Now we know that what the law says is addressed to those under the law, so that every mouth may be silenced and the whole world stand accountable to God, 
    20: since no human being will be justified in his sight by observing the law; for through the law comes consciousness of sin.
III. Justification Through Faith in Christ
Justification Apart from the Law.[f] 
    21: But now the righteousness of God has been manifested apart from the law, though testified to by the law and the prophets, 
    22: the righteousness of God through faith in Jesus Christ for all who believe. For there is no distinction; 
    23: all have sinned and are deprived of the glory of God. 
    24: They are justified freely by his grace through the redemption in Christ Jesus, 
    25: whom God set forth as an expiation, through faith, by his blood, to prove his righteousness because of the forgiveness of sins previously committed, 
    26: through the forbearance of God—to prove his righteousness in the present time, that he might be righteous and justify the one who has faith in Jesus.

    27: What occasion is there then for boasting? It is ruled out. On what principle, that of works? No, rather on the principle of faith.[j] 
    28: For we consider that a person is justified by faith apart from works of the law. 
    29: Does God belong to Jews alone? Does he not belong to Gentiles, too? Yes, also to Gentiles, 
    30: for God is one and will justify the circumcised on the basis of faith and the uncircumcised through faith. 
    31: Are we then annulling the law by this faith? Of course not! On the contrary, we are supporting the law.


  Chapter 4.

    1: What then can we say that Abraham found, our ancestor according to the flesh? 
    2: Indeed, if Abraham was justified on the basis of his works, he has reason to boast; but this was not so in the sight of God. 
    3: 
    4: a]
Abraham Justified by Faith. 1 What then can we say that Abraham found, our ancestor according to the flesh? 2 [b]Indeed, if Abraham was justified on the basis of his works, he has reason to boast; but this was not so in the sight of God. 3 For what does the scripture say? “Abraham believed God, and it was credited to him as righteousness.”[c] 4 A worker’s wage is credited not as a gift, but as something due. 
    5: But when one does not work, yet believes in the one who justifies the ungodly, his faith is credited as righteousness. 
    6: So also David declares the blessedness of the person to whom God credits righteousness apart from works:

    7: 
“Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven
    and whose sins are covered.

    8: 
Blessed is the man whose sin the Lord does not record.”

    9: oes this blessedness apply only to the circumcised, or to the uncircumcised as well? Now we assert that “faith was credited to Abraham as righteousness.” 
    10: Under what circumstances was it credited? Was he circumcised or not? He was not circumcised, but uncircumcised. 
    11: And he received the sign of circumcision as a seal on the righteousness received through faith while he was uncircumcised. Thus he was to be the father of all the uncircumcised who believe, so that to them  righteousness might be credited, 
    12: as well as the father of the circumcised who not only are circumcised but also follow the path of faith that our father Abraham walked while still uncircumcised.
Inheritance Through Faith. 
    13: It was not through the law that the promise was made to Abraham and his descendants that he would inherit the world, but through the righteousness that comes from faith. 
    14: For if those who adhere to the law are the heirs, faith is null and the promise is void. 
    15: For the law produces wrath; but where there is no law, neither is there violation. 
    16: For this reason, it depends on faith, so that it may be a gift, and the promise may be guaranteed to all his descendants, not to those who only adhere to the law but to those who follow the faith of Abraham, who is the father of all of us, 
    17: as it is written, “I have made you father of many nations.” He is our father in the sight of God, in whom he believed, who gives life to the dead and calls into being what does not exist. 
    18: He believed, hoping against hope, that he would become “the father of many nations,” according to what was said, “Thus shall your descendants be.” 
    19: He did not weaken in faith when he considered his own body as  dead (for he was almost a hundred years old) and the dead womb of Sarah. 
    20: He did not doubt God’s promise in unbelief; rather, he was empowered by faith and gave glory to God 
    21: and was fully convinced that what he had promised he was also able to do. 
    22: That is why “it was credited to him as righteousness.” 
    23: But it was not for him alone that it was written that “it was credited to him”; 
    24: it was also for us, to whom it will be credited, who believe in the one who raised Jesus our Lord from the dead, 
    25: who was handed over for our transgressions and was raised for our justification.


End of day 313.