Day 355:

Reading Revelation, chapters ['9', '10', '11', '12']:

  Chapter 9.

    1: Then the fifth angel blew his trumpet, and I saw a star that had fallen from the sky to the earth. It was given the key for the passage to the abyss. 
    2: It opened the passage to the abyss, and smoke came up out of the passage like smoke from a huge furnace. The sun and the air were darkened by the smoke from the passage. 
    3: Locusts came out of the smoke onto the land, and they were given the same power as scorpions of the earth. 
    4: They were told not to harm the grass of the earth or any plant or any tree, but only those people who did not have the seal of God on their foreheads. 
    5: They were not allowed to kill them but only to torment them for five months; the torment they inflicted was like that of a scorpion when it stings a person. 
    6: During that time these people will seek death but will not find it, and they will long to die but death will escape them.

    7: The appearance of the locusts was like that of horses ready for battle. On their heads they wore what looked like crowns of gold; their faces were like human faces, 
    8: 
    9: he Fifth Trumpet. 1 Then the fifth angel blew his trumpet, and I saw a star[b] that had fallen from the sky to the earth. It was given the key for the passage to the abyss. 2 It opened the passage to the abyss, and smoke came up out of the passage like smoke from a huge furnace. The sun and the air were darkened by the smoke from the passage. 3 Locusts came out of the smoke onto the land, and they were given the same power as scorpions[c] of the earth. 4 They were told not to harm the grass of the earth or any plant or any tree, but only those people who did not have the seal of God on their foreheads. 5 They were not allowed to kill them but only to torment them for five months;[d] the torment they inflicted was like that of a scorpion when it stings a person. 6 During that time these people will seek death but will not find it, and they will long to die but death will escape them.
7 [e]The appearance of the locusts was like that of horses ready for battle. On their heads they wore what looked like crowns of gold; their faces were like human faces, 8 and they had hair like women’s hair. Their teeth were like lions’ teeth, 9 and they had chests like iron breastplates. The sound of their wings was like the sound of many horse-drawn chariots racing into battle. 
    10: They had tails like scorpions, with stingers; with their tails they had power to harm people for five months. 
    11: They had as their king the angel of the abyss, whose name in Hebrew is Abaddon and in Greek Apollyon.

    12: The first woe has passed, but there are two more to come.
The Sixth Trumpet. 
    13: Then the sixth angel blew his trumpet, and I heard a voice coming from the [h] horns of the gold altar before God, 
    14: telling the sixth angel who held the trumpet, “Release the four angels who are bound at the banks of the great river Euphrates.” 
    15: So the four angels were released, who were prepared for this hour, day, month, and year to kill a third of the human race. 
    16: The number of cavalry troops was two hundred million; I heard their number. 
    17: Now in my vision this is how I saw the horses and their riders. They wore red, blue, and yellow breastplates, and the horses’ heads were like heads of lions, and out of their mouths came fire, smoke, and sulfur. 
    18: By these three plagues of fire, smoke, and sulfur that came out of their mouths a third of the human race was killed. 
    19: For the power of the horses is in their mouths and in their tails; for their tails are like snakes, with heads that inflict harm.

    20: The rest of the human race, who were not killed by these plagues, did not repent of the works of their hands, to give up the worship of demons and idols made from gold, silver, bronze, stone, and wood, which cannot see or hear or walk. 
    21: Nor did they repent of their murders, their magic potions, their unchastity, or their robberies.


  Chapter 10.

    1: 
The Angel with the Small Scroll. 1 Then I saw another mighty angel come down from heaven wrapped in a cloud, with a halo around his head; his face was like the sun and his feet were like pillars of fire. 
    2: In his hand he held a small scroll that had been opened. He placed his right foot on the sea and his left foot on the land, 
    3: and then he cried out in a loud voice as a lion roars. When he cried out, the seven thunders raised their voices, too. 
    4: When the seven thunders had spoken, I was about to write it down; but I heard a voice from heaven say, “Seal up what the seven thunders have spoken, but do not write it down.” 
    5: Then the angel I saw standing on the sea and on the land raised his right hand to heaven 
    6: and swore by the one who lives forever and ever, who created heaven and earth and sea and all that is in them, “There shall be no more delay. 
    7: At the time when you hear the seventh angel blow his trumpet, the mysterious plan of God shall be fulfilled, as he promised to his servants the prophets.”

    8: Then the voice that I had heard from heaven spoke to me again and said, “Go, take the scroll that lies open in the hand of the angel who is standing on the sea and on the land.” 
    9: 
    10: The Angel with the Small Scroll. 1 Then I saw another mighty angel come down from heaven wrapped in a cloud, with a halo around his head; his face was like the sun and his feet were like pillars of fire. 2 In his hand he held a small scroll that had been opened. He placed his right foot on the sea and his left foot on the land,[b] 3 and then he cried out in a loud voice as a lion roars. When he cried out, the seven thunders[c] raised their voices, too. 4 When the seven thunders had spoken, I was about to write it down; but I heard a voice from heaven say, “Seal up what the seven thunders have spoken, but do not write it down.” 5 Then the angel I saw standing on the sea and on the land raised his right hand to heaven 6 and swore by the one who lives forever and ever, who created heaven and earth and sea[d] and all that is in them, “There shall be no more delay. 7 At the time when you hear the seventh angel blow his trumpet, the mysterious plan of God[e] shall be fulfilled, as he promised to his servants the prophets.”
8 Then the voice that I had heard from heaven spoke to me again and said, “Go, take the scroll that lies open in the hand of the angel who is standing on the sea and on the land.” 9 So I went up to the angel and told him to give me the small scroll. He said to me, “Take and swallow it. It will turn your stomach sour, but in your mouth it will taste as sweet[f] as honey.” 10 I took the small scroll from the angel’s hand and swallowed it. In my mouth it was like sweet honey, but when I had eaten it, my stomach turned sour. 
    11: Then someone said to me, “You must prophesy again about many peoples, nations, tongues, and kings.”


  Chapter 11.

    1: 
The Two Witnesses. 1 Then I was given a measuring rod like a staff and I was told, “Come and measure the temple of God and the altar, and count those who are worshiping in it. 
    2: But exclude the outer court of the temple; do not measure it, for it has been handed over to the Gentiles, who will trample the holy city for forty-two months. 
    3: I will commission my two witnesses to prophesy for those twelve hundred and sixty days, wearing sackcloth.” 
    4: These are the two olive trees and the two lampstands that stand before the Lord of the earth. 
    5: If anyone wants to harm them, fire comes out of their mouths and devours their enemies. In this way, anyone wanting to harm them is sure to be slain. 
    6: They have the power to close up the sky so that no rain can fall during the time of their prophesying. They also have power to turn water into blood and to afflict the earth with any plague as often as they wish.

    7: When they have finished their testimony, the beast that comes up from the abyss will wage war against them and conquer them and kill them. 
    8: Their corpses will lie in the main street of the great city, which has the symbolic names “Sodom” and “Egypt,” where indeed their Lord was crucified. 
    9: h]Those from every people, tribe, tongue, and nation will gaze on their corpses for three and a half days, and they will not allow their corpses to be buried. 
    10: 
    11: The Two Witnesses. 1 Then I was given a measuring rod like a staff and I was told, “Come and measure the temple of God and the altar, and count those who are worshiping in it. 2 But exclude the outer court[b] of the temple; do not measure it, for it has been handed over to the Gentiles, who will trample the holy city for forty-two months. 3 I will commission my two witnesses[c] to prophesy for those twelve hundred and sixty days, wearing sackcloth.” 4 These are the two olive trees and the two lampstands[d] that stand before the Lord of the earth. 5 [e]If anyone wants to harm them, fire comes out of their mouths and devours their enemies. In this way, anyone wanting to harm them is sure to be slain. 6 They have the power to close up the sky so that no rain can fall during the time of their prophesying. They also have power to turn water into blood and to afflict the earth with any plague as often as they wish.
7 When they have finished their testimony, the beast that comes up from the abyss[f] will wage war against them and conquer them and kill them. 8 Their corpses will lie in the main street of the great city,[g] which has the symbolic names “Sodom” and “Egypt,” where indeed their Lord was crucified. 9 [h]Those from every people, tribe, tongue, and nation will gaze on their corpses for three and a half days, and they will not allow their corpses to be buried. 10 The inhabitants of the earth will gloat over them and be glad and exchange gifts because these two prophets tormented the inhabitants of the earth. 11 But after the three and a half days, a breath of life from God entered them. When they stood on their feet, great fear fell on those who saw them. 
    12: Then they heard a loud voice from heaven say to them, “Come up here.” So they went up to heaven in a cloud as their enemies looked on. 
    13: At that moment there was a great earthquake, and a tenth of the city fell in ruins. Seven thousand people were killed during the earthquake; the rest were terrified and gave glory to the God of heaven.

    14: The second woe has passed, but the third is coming soon.
The Seventh Trumpet. 
    15: Then the seventh angel blew his trumpet. There were loud voices in heaven, saying, “The kingdom of the world now belongs to our Lord and to his Anointed, and he will reign forever and ever.” 
    16: The twenty-four elders who sat on their thrones before God prostrated themselves and worshiped God 
    17: and said:
“We give thanks to you, Lord God almighty,
    who are and who were.
For you have assumed your great power
    and have established your reign.

    18: 
The nations raged,
    but your wrath has come,
    and the time for the dead to be judged,
and to recompense your servants, the prophets,
    and the holy ones and those who fear your name,
    the small and the great alike,
and to destroy those who destroy the earth.”

    19: Then God’s temple in heaven was opened, and the ark of his covenant could be seen in the temple. There were flashes of lightning, rumblings, and peals of thunder, an earthquake, and a violent hailstorm.


  Chapter 12.

    1: 
    2: The Woman and the Dragon. 1 A great sign appeared in the sky, a woman[b] clothed with the sun, with the moon under her feet, and on her head a crown of twelve stars. 2 She was with child and wailed aloud in pain as she labored to give birth.[c] 
    3: Then another sign appeared in the sky; it was a huge red dragon, with seven heads and ten horns, and on its heads were seven diadems. 
    4: Its tail swept away a third of the stars in the sky and hurled them down to the earth. Then the dragon stood before the woman about to give birth, to devour her child when she gave birth. 
    5: She gave birth to a son, a male child, destined to rule all the nations with an iron rod. Her child was caught up to God and his throne. 
    6: The woman herself fled into the desert where she had a place prepared by God, that there she might be taken care of for twelve hundred and sixty days.

    7: Then war broke out in heaven; Michael[h] and his angels battled against the dragon. The dragon and its angels fought back, 
    8: but they did not prevail and there was no longer any place for them in heaven. 
    9: he huge dragon, the ancient serpent, who is called the Devil and Satan, who deceived the whole world, was thrown down to earth, and its angels were thrown down with it.

    10: Then I heard a loud voice in heaven say:
“Now have salvation and power come,
    and the kingdom of our God
    and the authority of his Anointed.
For the accuser of our brothers is cast out,
    who accuses them before our God day and night.

    11: 
    12: The Woman and the Dragon. 1 A great sign appeared in the sky, a woman[b] clothed with the sun, with the moon under her feet, and on her head a crown of twelve stars. 2 She was with child and wailed aloud in pain as she labored to give birth.[c] 3 Then another sign appeared in the sky; it was a huge red dragon,[d] with seven heads and ten horns, and on its heads were seven diadems. 4 Its tail swept away a third of the stars in the sky and hurled them down to the earth. Then the dragon stood before the woman about to give birth, to devour her child when she gave birth. 5 She gave birth to a son, a male child, destined to rule all the nations with an iron rod.[e] Her child was caught up to God and his throne. 6 The woman herself fled into the desert where she had a place prepared by God, that there she might be taken care of for twelve hundred and sixty days.[f]
7 [g]Then war broke out in heaven; Michael[h] and his angels battled against the dragon. The dragon and its angels fought back, 8 but they did not prevail and there was no longer any place for them in heaven. 9 The huge dragon, the ancient serpent,[i] who is called the Devil and Satan, who deceived the whole world, was thrown down to earth, and its angels were thrown down with it.
10 Then I heard a loud voice in heaven say:
“Now have salvation and power come,
    and the kingdom of our God
    and the authority of his Anointed.
For the accuser[j] of our brothers is cast out,
    who accuses them before our God day and night.
11 
They conquered him by the blood of the Lamb
    and by the word of their testimony;
    love for life did not deter them from death.
12 
Therefore, rejoice, you heavens,
    and you who dwell in them.
But woe to you, earth and sea,
    for the Devil has come down to you in great fury,
    for he knows he has but a short time.”

    13: When the dragon saw that it had been thrown down to the earth, it pursued the woman who had given birth to the male child. 
    14: But the woman was given the two wings of the great eagle, so that she could fly to her place in the desert, where, far from the serpent, she was taken care of for a year, two years, and a half-year. 
    15: The serpent, however, spewed a torrent of water out of his mouth after the woman to sweep her away with the current. 
    16: But the earth helped the woman and opened its mouth and swallowed the flood that the dragon spewed out of its mouth. 
    17: Then the dragon became angry with the woman and went off to wage war against the rest of her offspring, those who keep God’s commandments and bear witness to Jesus. 
    18: It took its position on the sand of the sea.


End of day 355.