Day 237:

Reading Jeremiah, chapters ['33', '34', '35', '36']:

  Chapter 33.

    1: The word of the Lord came to Jeremiah a second time while he was still confined in the court of the guard: 
    2: 
    3: 
Restoration of Jerusalem. 1 The word of the Lord came to Jeremiah a second time while he was still confined in the court of the guard: 2 Thus says the Lord who made the earth, giving it shape and stability, Lord is his name: 3 Call to me, and I will answer you; I will tell you great things beyond the reach of your knowledge. 
    4: Thus says the Lord, the God of Israel, concerning the houses of this city and the houses of the kings of Judah, which are being torn down because of the siegeworks and the sword: 
    5: men come to battle the Chaldeans, and to fill these houses with the corpses of those whom I have struck down in my raging anger, when I hid my face from this city because of all their wickedness.

    6: Look! I am bringing the city recovery and healing; I will heal them and reveal to them an abundance of lasting peace. 
    7: I will restore the fortunes of Judah and Israel, and rebuild them as they were in the beginning. 
    8: I will purify them of all the guilt they incurred by sinning against me; I will forgive all their offenses by which they sinned and rebelled against me. 
    9: hen this city shall become joy for me, a name of praise and pride, before all the nations of the earth, as they hear of all the good I am doing for them. They shall fear and tremble because of all the prosperity I give it.

    10: Thus says the Lord: In this place, about which you say: “It is a waste without people or animals!” and in the cities of Judah, in the streets of Jerusalem now deserted, without people, without inhabitant, without animal, there shall yet be heard 
    11: the song of joy, the song of gladness, the song of the bridegroom, the song of the bride, the song of those bringing thank offerings to the house of the Lord: “Give thanks to the Lord of hosts, for the Lord is good; God’s love endures forever.” For I will restore the fortunes of this land as they were in the beginning, says the Lord.

    12: Thus says the Lord of hosts: In this place, now a waste, without people or animals, and in all its cities there shall again be sheepfolds for the shepherds to rest their flocks. 
    13: In the cities of the hill country, of the Shephelah and the Negeb, in the land of Benjamin and the neighborhood of Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah, flocks will again pass under the hands of the one who counts them, says the Lord.

    14: The days are coming—oracle of the Lord—when I will fulfill the promise I made to the house of Israel and the house of Judah. 
    15: In those days, at that time, I will make a just shoot spring up for David; he shall do what is right and just in the land. 
    16: In those days Judah shall be saved and Jerusalem shall dwell safely; this is the name they shall call her: “The Lord our justice.” 
    17: For thus says the Lord: David shall never lack a successor on the throne of the house of Israel, 
    18: nor shall the priests of Levi ever be lacking before me, to sacrifice burnt offerings, to burn cereal offerings, and to make sacrifices.

    19: This word of the Lord also came to Jeremiah: 
    20: Thus says the Lord: If you can break my covenant with day and my covenant with night so that day and night no longer appear in their proper time, 
    21: only then can my covenant with my servant David be broken, so that he will not have a descendant to act as king upon his throne, and my covenant with the priests of Levi who minister to me. 
    22: Just as the host of heaven cannot be numbered and the sands of the sea cannot be counted, so I will multiply the descendants of David my servant and the Levites who minister to me.

    23: This word of the Lord came to Jeremiah: 
    24: Have you not noticed what these people are saying: “The Lord has rejected the two tribes he had chosen”? They hold my people in contempt as if it were no longer a nation in their eyes. 
    25: Thus says the Lord: If I have no covenant with day and night, if I did not establish statutes for heaven and earth, 
    26: then I will also reject the descendants of Jacob and of David my servant, no longer selecting from his descendants rulers for the offspring of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Yes, I will restore their fortunes and show them mercy.


  Chapter 34.

    1: The word which came to Jeremiah from the Lord while Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, and all his army and all the earth’s kingdoms under his rule, and all the peoples were attacking Jerusalem and all her cities: 
    2: 
    3: 
    4: Fate of Zedekiah. 1 The word which came to Jeremiah from the Lord while Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, and all his army and all the earth’s kingdoms under his rule, and all the peoples were attacking Jerusalem and all her cities: 2 Thus says the Lord, the God of Israel: Go to Zedekiah, king of Judah, and tell him: Thus says the Lord: I am handing this city over to the king of Babylon; he will burn it with fire. 3 You yourself shall not escape his hand; rather you will be captured and fall into his hand. You shall see the king of Babylon eye to eye and speak to him face to face. Then you shall go to Babylon.
4 Just hear the word of the Lord, Zedekiah, king of Judah! Then, says the Lord concerning you, you shall not die by the sword. 
    5: You shall die in peace, and they will burn spices for you as they did for your ancestors, the earlier kings who preceded you, and they shall make lament over you, “Alas, Lord.” I myself make this promise—oracle of the Lord.

    6: Jeremiah the prophet told all these things to Zedekiah, king of Judah, in Jerusalem, 
    7: while the army of the king of Babylon was attacking Jerusalem and the remaining cities of Judah, Lachish, and Azekah. Only these fortified cities were left standing out of all the cities of Judah!
The Pact Broken.[b] 
    8: This is the word that came to Jeremiah from the Lord after King Zedekiah had made a covenant with all the people in Jerusalem to proclaim freedom: 
    9: veryone must free their Hebrew slaves, male and female, so that no one should hold another Judahite in servitude. 
    10: All the princes and the people who entered this covenant agreed to set free their slaves, their male and female servants, so that they should no longer be in servitude. But even though they agreed and freed them, 
    11: afterward they took back their male and female servants whom they had set free and again forced them into servitude.

    12: Then this word of the Lord came to Jeremiah: 
    13: Thus says the Lord, the God of Israel: I myself made a covenant with your ancestors the day I brought them out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery: 
    14: Every seventh year each of you must set free all Hebrews who have sold themselves to you; six years they shall serve you, but then you shall let them go free. Your ancestors, however, did not listen to me or obey me. 
    15: As for you, today you repented and did what is right in my eyes by proclaiming freedom for your neighbor and making a covenant before me in the house which bears my name. 
    16: But then you again profaned my name by taking back your male and female slaves whom you had just set free for life; you forced them to become your slaves again. 
    17: Therefore, thus says the Lord: You for your part did not obey me by proclaiming freedom for your families and neighbors. So I now proclaim freedom for you—oracle of the Lord—for the sword, starvation, and disease. I will make you an object of horror to all the kingdoms of the earth. 
    18: Those who violated my covenant and did not observe the terms of the covenant they made in my presence—I will make them like the calf which they cut in two so they could pass between its parts— 
    19: the princes of Judah and of Jerusalem, the court officials, the priests, and all the people of the land, who passed between the parts of the calf. 
    20: These I will hand over to their enemies, to those who seek their lives: their corpses shall become food for the birds of the air and the beasts of the field.

    21: Zedekiah, king of Judah, and his princes, I will hand also over to their enemies, to those who seek their lives, to the army of the king of Babylon which is now withdrawing from you. 
    22: I am giving the command—oracle of the Lord—to bring them back to this city. They shall attack and capture it, and burn it with fire; the cities of Judah I will turn into a waste, where no one dwells.


  Chapter 35.

    1: The word that came to Jeremiah from the Lord in the days of Jehoiakim, son of Josiah, king of Judah: 
    2: 
    3: 
The Faithful Rechabites. 1 The word that came to Jeremiah from the Lord in the days of Jehoiakim, son of Josiah, king of Judah: 2 Go to the house[b] of the Rechabites, speak to them, and bring them to the house of the Lord, to one of the rooms there, and give them wine to drink. 3 So I took Jaazaniah, son of Jeremiah, son of Habazziniah, his brothers and all his sons—the whole house of the Rechabites— 
    4: 
    5: The Faithful Rechabites. 1 The word that came to Jeremiah from the Lord in the days of Jehoiakim, son of Josiah, king of Judah: 2 Go to the house[b] of the Rechabites, speak to them, and bring them to the house of the Lord, to one of the rooms there, and give them wine to drink. 3 So I took Jaazaniah, son of Jeremiah, son of Habazziniah, his brothers and all his sons—the whole house of the Rechabites— 4 and I brought them to the house of the Lord, to the room of the sons of Hanan,[c] son of Igdaliah, the man of God, next to the room of the princes above the room of Maaseiah, son of Shallum, the guard at the entrance. 5 I set before the Rechabites bowls full of wine, and cups, and said to them, “Drink some wine.”

    6: “We do not drink wine,” they said to me; “Jonadab, Rechab’s son, our father, commanded us, ‘Neither you nor your children shall ever drink wine. 
    7: Build no house and sow no seed; do not plant vineyards or own any. You must dwell in tents all your lives, so that you may live long on the land where you live as resident aliens.’ 
    8: We have obeyed Jonadab, Rechab’s son, our father, in everything that he commanded us: not drinking wine as long as we live—neither we nor our wives nor our sons nor our daughters; 
    9: ot building houses to live in; not owning vineyards or fields or crops. 
    10: We live in tents, doing everything our father Jonadab commanded us. 
    11: But when Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, invaded this land, we said, ‘Come, let us go into Jerusalem to escape the army of the Chaldeans and the army of the Arameans.’ That is why we are now living in Jerusalem.”

    12: Then the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah: 
    13: Thus says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel: Go, say to the people of Judah and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem: Will you not take correction and obey my words?—oracle of the Lord. 
    14: The words of Jonadab, Rechab’s son, by which he commanded his children not to drink wine, have been upheld: to this day they have not drunk wine; they obeyed their ancestor’s command. I, however, have spoken to you time and again. But you did not obey me! 
    15: Time and again I sent you all my servants the prophets, saying: Turn away, each of you, from your evil way and reform your actions! Do not follow other gods to serve them that you may remain in the land which I gave you and your ancestors. But you did not pay attention. You did not obey me. 
    16: Yes, the children of Jonadab, Rechab’s son, upheld the command which their father laid on them. But this people has not obeyed me! 
    17: Now, therefore, says the Lord God of hosts, the God of Israel: I will soon bring upon Judah and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem every evil with which I threatened them because I spoke but they did not obey, I called but they did not answer.

    18: But to the house of the Rechabites Jeremiah said: Thus says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel: Since you have obeyed the command of Jonadab, your father, kept all his commands and done everything he commanded you, 
    19: therefore, thus says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel: Never shall there fail to be a descendant of Jonadab, Rechab’s son, standing in my presence.


  Chapter 36.

    1: In the fourth year of Jehoiakim, son of Josiah, king of Judah, this word came to Jeremiah from the Lord: 
    2: 
    3: 
Baruch, the Scribe of Jeremiah. 1 In the fourth year of Jehoiakim, son of Josiah, king of Judah, this word came to Jeremiah from the Lord: 2 Take a scroll and write on it all the words I have spoken to you about Israel, Judah, and all the nations, from the day I first spoke to you, from the days of Josiah, until today. 3 Perhaps, if the house of Judah hears all the evil I have in mind to do to them, so that all of them turn from their evil way, then I can forgive their wickedness and their sin. 
    4: So Jeremiah called Baruch, son of Neriah, and he wrote down on a scroll what Jeremiah said, all the words which the Lord had spoken to him. 
    5: 
    6: Baruch, the Scribe of Jeremiah. 1 In the fourth year of Jehoiakim, son of Josiah, king of Judah, this word came to Jeremiah from the Lord: 2 Take a scroll and write on it all the words I have spoken to you about Israel, Judah, and all the nations, from the day I first spoke to you, from the days of Josiah, until today. 3 Perhaps, if the house of Judah hears all the evil I have in mind to do to them, so that all of them turn from their evil way, then I can forgive their wickedness and their sin. 4 So Jeremiah called Baruch, son of Neriah, and he wrote down on a scroll what Jeremiah said, all the words which the Lord had spoken to him. 5 Then Jeremiah commanded Baruch: “I cannot enter the house of the Lord; I am barred from it. 6 So you yourself must go. On a fast day in the hearing of the people in the Lord’s house, read the words of the Lord from the scroll you wrote at my dictation; read them also to all the people of Judah who come up from their cities. 
    7: Perhaps they will present their supplication before the Lord and will all turn back from their evil way; for great is the anger and wrath with which the Lord has threatened this people.”

    8: Baruch, son of Neriah, did everything Jeremiah the prophet commanded; from the scroll he read the Lord’s words in the Lord’s house. 
    9: n the ninth month, in the fifth year of Jehoiakim, son of Josiah, king of Judah, all the people of Jerusalem and all those who came from Judah’s cities to Jerusalem proclaimed a fast before the Lord. 
    10: So Baruch read the words of Jeremiah from the scroll in the room of Gemariah, son of the scribe Shaphan, in the upper court of the Lord’s house, at the entrance of the New Temple Gate, in the hearing of all the people.

    11: Now Micaiah, son of Gemariah, son of Shaphan, heard all the words of the Lord read from the scroll. 
    12: So he went down to the house of the king, into the scribe’s chamber, where the princes were meeting in session: Elishama, the scribe; Delaiah, son of Shemaiah; Elnathan, son of Achbor; Gemariah, son of Shaphan; Zedekiah, son of Hananiah; and the other princes. 
    13: Micaiah reported to them all that he had heard Baruch read from his scroll in the hearing of the people. 
    14: The princes immediately sent Jehudi, son of Nethaniah, son of Shelemiah, son of Cushi, to Baruch with the order: “The scroll you read in the hearing of the people—bring it with you and come.” Scroll in hand, Baruch, son of Neriah, went to them. 
    15: “Sit down,” they said to him, “and read it in our hearing.” Baruch read it in their hearing, 
    16: and when they had heard all its words, they turned to each other in alarm and said to Baruch, “We have to tell the king all these things.” 
    17: Then they asked Baruch: “Tell us, please, how did you come to write down all these words? Was it at his dictation?” 
    18: “Yes, he would dictate all these words to me,” Baruch answered them, “while I wrote them down with ink in the scroll.” 
    19: The princes said to Baruch, “Go into hiding, you and Jeremiah; do not let anyone know where you are.”

    20: They went in to the king, into the courtyard; they had deposited the scroll in the room of Elishama the scribe. When they told the king everything that had happened, 
    21: the king sent Jehudi to get the scroll. Jehudi brought it from the room of Elishama the scribe, and read it to the king and to all the princes who were attending the king. 
    22: Now the king was sitting in his winter house, since it was the ninth month, and a fire was burning in the brazier before him. 
    23: Each time Jehudi finished reading three or four columns, he would cut off the piece with a scribe’s knife and throw it into the fire in the brazier, until the entire scroll was consumed in the fire in the brazier. 
    24: As they were listening to all these words the king and all his officials did not become alarmed, nor did they tear their garments. 
    25: And though Elnathan, Delaiah, and Gemariah urged the king not to burn the scroll, he would not listen to them. 
    26: He commanded Jerahmeel, a royal prince, and Seraiah, son of Azriel, and Shelemiah, son of Abdeel, to arrest Baruch, the scribe, and Jeremiah the prophet. But the Lord had hidden them away.

    27: The word of the Lord came to Jeremiah, after the king burned the scroll and the words Jeremiah had dictated to Baruch: 
    28: Take another scroll, and write on it all the words in the first scroll, which Jehoiakim, king of Judah, burned. 
    29: And against Jehoiakim, king of Judah, say this: Thus says the Lord: You are the one who burned that scroll, saying, “Why did you write on it: Babylon’s king shall surely come and ravage this land, emptying it of every living thing”? 
    30: The Lord now says of Jehoiakim, king of Judah: No descendant of his shall sit on David’s throne; his corpse shall be thrown out, exposed to heat by day, frost by night. 
    31: I will punish him and his descendants and his officials for their wickedness; upon them, the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the people of Judah I will bring all the evil threats to which they did not listen.

    32: Then Jeremiah took another scroll and gave it to his scribe, Baruch, son of Neriah, who wrote on it at Jeremiah’s dictation all the words contained in the scroll which Jehoiakim, king of Judah, had burned in the fire, adding many words like them.


End of day 237.