Day 279:

Reading Zechariah, chapters ['5', '6', '7', '8']:

  Chapter 5.

    1: Then I raised my eyes again and saw a flying scroll. 
    2: He asked me, “What do you see?” I answered, “I see a flying scroll, twenty cubits long and ten cubits wide.” 
    3: Then he said to me: “This is the curse which is to go forth over the whole land. According to it, every thief and every perjurer will be expelled. 
    4: 
    5: Fifth Vision: The Flying Scroll. 1 Then I raised my eyes again and saw a flying scroll. 2 He asked me, “What do you see?” I answered, “I see a flying scroll, twenty cubits long and ten cubits wide.” 3 Then he said to me: “This is the curse which is to go forth over the whole land. According to it, every thief and every perjurer[b] will be expelled. 4 I will send it forth—oracle of the Lord of hosts—so that it will come to the house of the thief, and into the house of the one who swears falsely by my name. It shall lodge within each house, consuming it, timber and stones.”
Sixth Vision: The Basket of Wickedness. 5 Then the angel who spoke with me came forward and said to me, “Raise your eyes and look. What is this that comes forth?” 
    6: I said, “What is it?” And he answered, “This is the basket that is coming.” And he said, “This is their guilt in all the land.” 
    7: Then a leaden cover was lifted, and there was a woman sitting inside the basket. 
    8: He said, “This is Wickedness,” and he thrust her inside the basket, pushing the leaden weight into the opening.

    9: hen I raised my eyes and saw two women coming forth with wind under their wings—they had wings like the wings of a stork—and they lifted the basket into the air. 
    10: I said to the angel who spoke with me, “Where are they taking the basket?” 
    11: He replied, “To build a temple for it in the land of Shinar. When the temple is constructed, they will set it there on its base.”


  Chapter 6.

    1: Again I raised my eyes and saw four chariots coming out from between two mountains; and the mountains were of bronze. 
    2: The first chariot had red horses, the second chariot black horses, 
    3: the third chariot white horses, and the fourth chariot dappled horses—all of them strong horses. 
    4: I asked the angel who spoke with me, “What are these, my lord?” 
    5: 
    6: Seventh Vision: Four Chariots. 1 Again I raised my eyes and saw four chariots coming out from between two mountains; and the mountains were of bronze. 2 The first chariot had red horses, the second chariot black horses, 3 the third chariot white horses, and the fourth chariot dappled horses—all of them strong horses. 4 I asked the angel who spoke with me, “What are these, my lord?” 5 The angel answered me, “These are the four winds of the heavens,[b] which are coming forth after presenting themselves before the Lord of all the earth. 6 The one with the black horses is going toward the land of the north, and the white horses go toward the west, and the dappled ones go toward the land of the south.” 
    7: These strong horses went out, eager to set about patrolling the earth, for he said, “Go, patrol the earth!” So they patrolled the earth. 
    8: Then he cried out to me and said, “See, those who go forth to the land of the north provide rest for my spirit in the land of the north.”
The Crowning. 
    9: hen the word of the Lord came to me: 
    10: Take from the exiles—Heldai, Tobijah, Jedaiah—and go the same day to the house of Josiah, son of Zephaniah. (These had come from Babylon.) 
    11: You will take silver and gold, and make crowns; place one on the head of Joshua, son of Jehozadak, the high priest. 
    12: And say to him: Thus says the Lord of hosts: There is a man whose name is Branch—and from his place he will branch out and he will build the temple of the Lord. 
    13: He will build the temple of the Lord, and taking up the royal insignia, he will sit as ruler upon his throne. The priest will be at his right hand, and between the two of them there will be peaceful understanding. 
    14: The other crown will be in the temple of the Lord as a gracious reminder to Heldai, Tobijah, Jedaiah, and the son of Zephaniah. 
    15: And they who are from afar will come and build the temple of the Lord, and you will know that the Lord of hosts has sent me to you. This will happen if you truly obey the Lord your God.


  Chapter 7.

    1: In the fourth year of Darius the king, the word of the Lord came to Zechariah, on the fourth day of the ninth month, Kislev. 
    2: Bethelsarezer sent Regem-melech and his men to implore the favor of the Lord 
    3: and to ask the priests of the house of the Lord of hosts, and the prophets, “Must I weep and abstain in the fifth month as I have been doing these many years?” 
    4: Then the word of the Lord of hosts came to me: 
    5: Say to all the people of the land and to the priests: When you fasted and lamented in the fifth and in the seventh month these seventy years, was it really for me that you fasted? 
    6: 
    7: A Question About Fasting. 1 In the fourth year of Darius the king, the word of the Lord came to Zechariah, on the fourth day of the ninth month, Kislev. 2 Bethelsarezer sent Regem-melech and his men to implore the favor of the Lord 3 and to ask the priests of the house of the Lord of hosts, and the prophets, “Must I weep and abstain in the fifth month[b] as I have been doing these many years?” 4 Then the word of the Lord of hosts came to me: 5 Say to all the people of the land and to the priests: When you fasted and lamented in the fifth and in the seventh month[c] these seventy years, was it really for me that you fasted? 6 When you were eating and drinking, was it not for yourselves that you ate and for yourselves that you drank?
7 Are these not the words which the Lord proclaimed through the earlier prophets,[d] when Jerusalem and its surrounding cities were inhabited and secure, when the Negeb and the Shephelah were inhabited? 
    8: The word of the Lord came to Zechariah: 
    9: hus says the Lord of hosts: Judge with true justice, and show kindness and compassion toward each other. 
    10: Do not oppress the widow or the orphan, the resident alien or the poor; do not plot evil against one another in your hearts. 
    11: But they refused to listen; they stubbornly turned their backs and stopped their ears so as not to hear. 
    12: And they made their hearts as hard as diamond so as not to hear the instruction and the words that the Lord of hosts had sent by his spirit through the earlier prophets. So great anger came from the Lord of hosts: 
    13: Just as when I called out and they did not listen, so they will call out and I will not listen, says the Lord of hosts. 
    14: And I will scatter them among all the nations that they do not know. So the land was left desolate behind them with no one moving about, and they made a pleasant land into a wasteland.


  Chapter 8.

    1: Then the word of the Lord of hosts came: 
    2: Thus says the Lord of hosts:
I am intensely jealous for Zion,
    stirred to jealous wrath for her.

    3: Thus says the Lord:
I have returned to Zion,
    and I will dwell within Jerusalem;
Jerusalem will be called the faithful city,
    and the mountain of the Lord of hosts, the holy mountain.

    4: Thus says the Lord of hosts:
Old men and old women will again sit in the streets of Jerusalem, each with staff in hand because of old age. 
    5: The city will be filled with boys and girls playing in its streets.

    6: Thus says the Lord of hosts:
Even if this should seem impossible in the eyes of the remnant of this people in those days, should it seem impossible in my eyes also?—oracle of the Lord of hosts.

    7: 
    8: Seven Oracles: Judah and Zion Restored. 1 Then the word of the Lord of hosts came: 2 Thus says the Lord of hosts:
I am intensely jealous for Zion,
    stirred to jealous wrath for her.
3 Thus says the Lord:
I have returned to Zion,
    and I will dwell within Jerusalem;
Jerusalem will be called the faithful city,
    and the mountain of the Lord of hosts, the holy mountain.
4 Thus says the Lord of hosts:
Old men and old women will again sit in the streets of Jerusalem, each with staff in hand because of old age. 5 The city will be filled with boys and girls playing in its streets.
6 Thus says the Lord of hosts:
Even if this should seem impossible in the eyes of the remnant of this people in those days, should it seem impossible in my eyes also?—oracle of the Lord of hosts.
7 Thus says the Lord of hosts:
I am going to rescue my people from the land of the rising sun, and from the land of the setting sun. 8 I will bring them back to dwell within Jerusalem. They will be my people, and I will be their God, in faithfulness and justice.

    9: hus says the Lord of hosts:
Let your hands be strong, you who now hear these words which were spoken by the prophets when the foundation of the house of the Lord of hosts was laid for the building of the temple. 
    10: For before those days, there were no wages for people, nor hire for animals. Those who came and went were not safe from the enemy, for I set neighbor against neighbor. 
    11: But now I will not deal with the remnant of this people as in former days—oracle of the Lord of hosts.

    12: 
For there will be a sowing of peace:
    the vine will yield its fruit,
    the land will yield its crops,
    and the heavens will yield their dew.
I will give all these things to the remnant of this people to possess. 
    13: Just as you became a curse among the nations, O house of Judah and house of Israel, so will I save you that you may be a blessing. Do not fear; let your hands be strong.

    14: Thus says the Lord of hosts:
Just as I intended to harm you when your ancestors angered me—says the Lord of hosts—and I did not relent, 
    15: so again in these days I intend to favor Jerusalem and the house of Judah; do not fear! 
    16: These then are the things you must do: Speak the truth to one another; judge with honesty and complete justice in your gates. 
    17: Let none of you plot evil against another in your heart, nor love a false oath. For all these things I hate—oracle of the Lord.
Three Oracles: Judah and the Nations. 
    18: The word of the Lord of hosts came to me:

    19: Thus says the Lord of hosts:
The fast days of the fourth, the fifth, the seventh, and the tenth months will become occasions of joy and gladness, and happy festivals for the house of Judah. So love faithfulness and peace!

    20: Thus says the Lord of hosts:
There will yet come peoples and inhabitants of many cities; 
    21: and the inhabitants of one city will approach those of another, and say, “Come! let us go to implore the favor of the Lord and to seek the Lord of hosts. I too am going.” 
    22: Many peoples and strong nations will come to seek the Lord of hosts in Jerusalem and to implore the favor of the Lord.

    23: Thus says the Lord of hosts:
In those days ten people from nations of every language will take hold, yes, will take hold of the cloak of every Judahite and say, “Let us go with you, for we have heard that God is with you.”


End of day 279.