Day 325:

Reading Galatians, chapters ['1', '2', '3', '4']:

  Chapter 1.

    1: Greeting. 1 Paul, an apostle[b] not from human beings nor through a human being but through Jesus Christ and God the Father who raised him from the dead, 
    2: and all the brothers who are with me, to the churches of Galatia: 
    3: grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ, 
    4: who gave himself for our sins that he might rescue us from the present evil age in accord with the will of our God and Father, 
    5: to whom be glory forever and ever. Amen.
II. Loyalty to the Gospel

    6: I am amazed that you are so quickly forsaking the one who called you by [the] grace [of Christ] for a different gospel 
    7: (not that there is another). But there are some who are disturbing you and wish to pervert the gospel of Christ. 
    8: But even if we or an angel from heaven should preach  a gospel other than the one that we preached to you, let that one be accursed![g] 
    9: s we have said before, and now I say again, if anyone preaches to you a gospel other than the one that you received, let that one be accursed!

    10: Am I now currying favor with human beings or God? Or am I seeking to please people? If I were still trying to please people, I would not be a slave of Christ.
III. Paul’s Defense of His Gospel and His Authority[i]
His Call by Christ. 
    11: Now I want you to know, brothers, that the gospel preached by me is not of human origin. 
    12: For I did not receive it from a human being, nor was I taught it, but it came through a revelation of Jesus Christ.

    13: For you heard of my former way of life in Judaism, how I persecuted the church of God beyond measure and tried to destroy it, 
    14: and progressed in Judaism beyond many of my contemporaries among my race, since I was even more a zealot for my ancestral traditions. 
    15: But when , who from my mother’s womb had set me apart and called me through his grace, was pleased 
    16: to reveal his Son to me, so that I might proclaim him to the Gentiles, I did not immediately consult flesh and blood, 
    17: nor did I go up to Jerusalem to those who were apostles before me; rather, I went into Arabia and then returned to Damascus.

    18: Then after three years[o] I went up to Jerusalem to confer with Cephas and remained with him for fifteen days. 
    19: But I did not see any other of the apostles, only James the brother of the Lord. 
    20: (As to what I am writing to you, behold, before God, I am not lying.) 
    21: Then I went into the regions of Syria and Cilicia. 
    22: And I was unknown personally to the churches of Judea that are in Christ; 
    23: they only kept hearing that “the one who once was persecuting us is now preaching the faith he once tried to destroy.” 
    24: So they glorified God because of me.


  Chapter 2.

    1: 
    2: The Council of Jerusalem. 1 Then after fourteen years I again went up to Jerusalem with Barnabas,[b] taking Titus along also. 2 I went up in accord with a revelation,[c] and I presented to them the gospel that I preach to the Gentiles—but privately to those of repute—so that I might not be running, or have run, in vain. 
    3: Moreover, not even Titus, who was with me, although he was a Greek, was compelled to be circumcised, 
    4: but because of the false brothers secretly brought in, who slipped in to spy on our freedom that we have in Christ Jesus, that they might enslave us— 
    5: to them we did not submit even for a moment, so that the truth of the gospel might remain intact for you. 
    6: But from those who were reputed to be important (what they once were makes no difference to me; God shows no partiality)—those of repute made me add nothing. 
    7: On the contrary, when they saw that I had been entrusted with the gospel to the uncircumcised, just as Peter to the circumcised, 
    8: for the one who worked in Peter for an apostolate to the circumcised worked also in me for the Gentiles, 
    9: nd when they recognized the grace bestowed upon me, James and Cephas and John, who were reputed to be pillars, gave me and Barnabas their right hands in partnership, that we should go to the Gentiles and they to the circumcised. 
    10: Only, we were to be mindful of the poor, which is the very thing I was eager to do.
Peter’s Inconsistency at Antioch.[j] 
    11: And when Cephas came to Antioch, I opposed him to his face because he clearly was wrong. 
    12: For, until some people came from James, he used to eat with the Gentiles; but when they came, he began to draw back and separated himself, because he was afraid of the circumcised. 
    13: And the rest of the Jews [also] acted hypocritically along with him, with the result that even Barnabas was carried away by their hypocrisy. 
    14: But when I saw that they were not on the right road in line with the truth of the gospel, I said to Cephas in front of all, “If you, though a Jew, are living like a Gentile and not like a Jew, how can you compel the Gentiles to live like Jews?”
Faith and Works.[o] 
    15: We, who are Jews by nature and not sinners from among the Gentiles, 
    16:  who know that a person is not justified by works of the law but through faith in Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Christ Jesus that we may be justified by faith in Christ and not by works of the law, because by works of the law no one will be justified.[p] 
    17: But if, in seeking to be justified in Christ, we ourselves are found to be sinners, is Christ then a minister of sin? Of course not! 
    18: But if I am building up again those things that I tore down, then I show myself to be a transgressor. 
    19: For through the law I died to the law, that I might live for God. I have been crucified with Christ; 
    20: yet I live, no longer I, but Christ lives in me; insofar as I now live in the flesh, I live by faith in the Son of God who has loved me and given himself up for me. 
    21: I do not nullify the grace of God; for if justification comes through the law, then Christ died for nothing.


  Chapter 3.

    1: O stupid Galatians! Who has bewitched you, before whose eyes Jesus Christ was publicly portrayed as crucified? 
    2: 
    3: Justification by Faith. 1 O stupid[b] Galatians! Who has bewitched you, before whose eyes Jesus Christ was publicly portrayed as crucified? 2 I want to learn only this from you: did you receive the Spirit from works of the law, or from faith in what you heard?[c] 3 Are you so stupid? After beginning with the Spirit, are you now ending with the flesh?[d] 
    4: Did you experience so many things in vain?—if indeed it was in vain. 
    5: Does, then, the one who supplies the Spirit to you and works mighty deeds among you do so from works of the law or from faith in what you heard? 
    6: Thus Abraham “believed God, and it was credited to him as righteousness.”

    7: Realize then that it is those who have faith who are children of Abraham. 
    8: Scripture, which saw in advance that God would justify the Gentiles by faith, foretold the good news to Abraham, saying, “Through you shall all the nations be blessed.” 
    9: onsequently, those who have faith are blessed along with Abraham who had faith. 
    10: For all who depend on works of the law are under a curse; for it is written, “Cursed be everyone who does not persevere in doing all the things written in the book of the law.” 
    11: And that no one is justified before God by the law is clear, for “the one who is righteous by faith will live.” 
    12: But the law does not depend on faith; rather, “the one who does these things will live by them.” 
    13: Christ ransomed us from the curse of the law by becoming a curse for us, for it is written, “Cursed be everyone who hangs on a tree,” 
    14: that the blessing of Abraham might be extended to the Gentiles through Christ Jesus, so that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith.
The Law Did Not Nullify the Promise. 
    15: Brothers, in human terms I say that no one can annul or amend even a human will once ratified. 
    16: Now the promises were made to Abraham and to his descendant. It does not say, “And to descendants,” as referring to many, but as referring to one, “And to your descendant,” who is Christ. 
    17: This is what I mean: the law, which came four hundred and thirty years afterward, does not annul a covenant previously ratified by God, so as to cancel the promise. 
    18: For if the inheritance comes from the law, it is no longer from a promise; but God bestowed it on Abraham through a promise.

    19: Why, then, the law? It was added for transgressions, until the descendant[n] came to whom the promise had been made; it was promulgated by angels at the hand of a mediator. 
    20: Now there is no mediator when only one party is involved, and God is one. 
    21: Is the law then opposed to the promises ? Of course not! For if a law had been given that could bring life, then righteousness would in reality come from the law. 
    22: But scripture confined all things under the power of sin, that through faith in Jesus Christ the promise might be given to those who believe.
What Faith Has Brought Us. 
    23: Before faith came, we were held in custody under law, confined for the faith that was to be revealed. 
    24: Consequently, the law was our disciplinarian for Christ, that we might be justified by faith. 
    25: But now that faith has come, we are no longer under a disciplinarian. 
    26: For through faith you are all children of God in Christ Jesus. 
    27: For all of you who were baptized into Christ have clothed yourselves with Christ.[s] 
    28: There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither slave nor free person, there is not male and female; for you are all one in Christ Jesus. 
    29: And if you belong to Christ, then you are Abraham’s descendant, heirs according to the promise.


  Chapter 4.

    1: I mean that as long as the heir is not of age, he is no different from a slave, although he is the owner of everything, 
    2: but he is under the supervision of guardians and administrators until the date set by his father. 
    3: 
    4: God’s Free Children in Christ. 1 I mean that as long as the heir is not of age,[b] he is no different from a slave, although he is the owner of everything, 2 but he is under the supervision of guardians and administrators until the date set by his father. 3 In the same way we also, when we were not of age, were enslaved to the elemental powers of the world.[c] 4 But when the fullness of time had come, God sent his Son, born of a woman, born under the law, 
    5: to ransom those under the law, so that we might receive adoption. 
    6: As proof that you are children, God sent the spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying out, “Abba, Father!” 
    7: So you are no longer a slave but a child, and if a child then also an heir, through God.
Do Not Throw This Freedom Away. 
    8: At a time when you did not know God, you became slaves to things that by nature are not gods; 
    9: ut now that you have come to know God, or rather to be known by God, how can you turn back again to the weak and destitute elemental powers? Do you want to be slaves to them all over again? 
    10: You are observing days, months, seasons, and years. 
    11: I am afraid on your account that perhaps I have labored for you in vain.
Appeal to Former Loyalty.[i] 
    12: I implore you, brothers, be as I am, because I have also become as you are. You did me no wrong; 
    13: you know that it was because of a physical illness that I originally preached the gospel to you, 
    14: and you did not show disdain or contempt because of the trial caused you by my physical condition, but rather you received me as an angel of God, as Christ Jesus. 
    15: Where now is that blessedness of yours? Indeed, I can testify to you that, if it had been possible, you would have torn out your eyes and given them to me. 
    16: So now have I become your enemy by telling you the truth? 
    17: They show interest in you, but not in a good way; they want to isolate you, so that you may show interest in them. 
    18: Now it is good to be shown interest for good reason at all times, and not only when I am with you. 
    19: My children, for whom I am again in labor until Christ be formed in you! 
    20: I would like to be with you now and to change my tone, for I am perplexed because of you.
An Allegory on Christian Freedom. 
    21: Tell me, you who want to be under the law, do you not listen to the law? 
    22: For it is written that Abraham had two sons, one by the slave woman and the other by the freeborn woman. 
    23: The son of the slave woman was born naturally, the son of the freeborn through a promise. 
    24: Now this is an allegory. These women represent two covenants. One was from Mount Sinai, bearing children for slavery; this is Hagar. 
    25: Hagar represents Sinai, a mountain in Arabia; it corresponds to the present Jerusalem, for she is in slavery along with her children. 
    26: But the Jerusalem above is freeborn, and she is our mother. 
    27: For it is written:
“Rejoice, you barren one who bore no children;
    break forth and shout, you who were not in labor;
for more numerous are the children of the deserted one
    than of her who has a husband.”

    28: Now you, brothers, like Isaac, are children of the promise. 
    29: But just as then the child of the flesh persecuted the child of the spirit, it is the same now. 
    30: But what does the scripture say?
“Drive out the slave woman and her son!
    For the son of the slave woman shall not share the inheritance with the son”
of the freeborn. 
    31: Therefore, brothers, we are children not of the slave woman but of the freeborn woman.


End of day 325.