Day 306:

Reading Acts, chapters ['1', '2', '3', '4']:

  Chapter 1.

    1: a]
The Promise of the Spirit. 1 In the first book, Theophilus, I dealt with all that Jesus did and taught 
    2: until the day he was taken up, after giving instructions through the holy Spirit to the apostles whom he had chosen. 
    3: He presented himself alive to them by many proofs after he had suffered, appearing to them during forty days and speaking about the kingdom of God. 
    4: While meeting with them, he enjoined them not to depart from Jerusalem, but to wait for “the promise of the Father about which you have heard me speak; 
    5: for John baptized with water, but in a few days you will be baptized with the holy Spirit.”
The Ascension of Jesus. 
    6: When they had gathered together they asked him, “Lord, are you at this time going to restore the kingdom to Israel?” 
    7: He answered them, “It is not for you to know the times or seasons that the Father has established by his own authority. 
    8: But you will receive power when the holy Spirit comes upon you, and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem, throughout Judea and Samaria, and to the ends of the earth.” 
    9: hen he had said this, as they were looking on, he was lifted up, and a cloud took him from their sight. 
    10: While they were looking intently at the sky as he was going, suddenly two men dressed in white garments stood beside them. 
    11: They said, “Men of Galilee, why are you standing there looking at the sky? This Jesus who has been taken up from you into heaven will return in the same way as you have seen him going into heaven.” 
    12: Then they returned to Jerusalem from the mount called Olivet, which is near Jerusalem, a sabbath day’s journey away.
The First Community in Jerusalem. 
    13: When they entered the city they went to the upper room where they were staying, Peter and John and James and Andrew, Philip and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew, James son of Alphaeus, Simon the Zealot, and Judas son of James. 
    14: All these devoted themselves with one accord to prayer, together with some women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and his brothers.
The Choice of Judas’s Successor. 
    15: During those days Peter stood up in the midst of the brothers (there was a group of about one hundred and twenty persons in the one place). He said, 
    16: “My brothers, the scripture had to be fulfilled which the holy Spirit spoke beforehand through the mouth of David, concerning Judas, who was the guide for those who arrested Jesus. 
    17: He was numbered among us and was allotted a share in this ministry. 
    18: He bought a parcel of land with the wages of his iniquity, and falling headlong, he burst open in the middle, and all his insides spilled out. 
    19: This became known to everyone who lived in Jerusalem, so that the parcel of land was called in their language ‘Akeldama,’ that is, Field of Blood. 
    20: For it is written in the Book of Psalms:
‘Let his encampment become desolate,
    and may no one dwell in it.’
And:
‘May another take his office.’

    21: Therefore, it is necessary that one of the men who accompanied us the whole time the Lord Jesus came and went among us, 
    22: beginning from the baptism of John until the day on which he was taken up from us, become with us a witness to his resurrection.” 
    23: So they proposed two, Joseph called Barsabbas, who was also known as Justus, and Matthias. 
    24: Then they prayed, “You, Lord, who know the hearts of all, show which one of these two you have chosen 
    25: to take the place in this apostolic ministry from which Judas turned away to go to his own place.” 
    26: Then they gave lots to them, and the lot fell upon Matthias, and he was counted with the eleven apostles.


  Chapter 2.

    1: 
    2: The Coming of the Spirit. 1 When the time for Pentecost was fulfilled, they were all in one place together. 2 And suddenly there came from the sky a noise like a strong driving wind,[b] and it filled the entire house in which they were. 
    3: Then there appeared to them tongues as of fire, which parted and came to rest on each one of them. 
    4: And they were all filled with the holy Spirit and began to speak in different tongues, as the Spirit enabled them to proclaim.

    5: Now there were devout Jews from every nation under heaven staying in Jerusalem. 
    6: At this sound, they gathered in a large crowd, but they were confused because each one heard them speaking in his own language. 
    7: They were astounded, and in amazement they asked, “Are not all these people who are speaking Galileans? 
    8: Then how does each of us hear them in his own native language? 
    9: e are Parthians, Medes, and Elamites, inhabitants of Mesopotamia, Judea and Cappadocia, Pontus and Asia, 
    10: Phrygia and Pamphylia, Egypt and the districts of Libya near Cyrene, as well as travelers from Rome, 
    11: both Jews and converts to Judaism, Cretans and Arabs, yet we hear them speaking in our own tongues of the mighty acts of God.” 
    12: They were all astounded and bewildered, and said to one another, “What does this mean?” 
    13: But others said, scoffing, “They have had too much new wine.”
II. The Mission in Jerusalem
Peter’s Speech at Pentecost. 
    14: Then Peter stood up with the Eleven, raised his voice, and proclaimed to them, “You who are Jews, indeed all of you staying in Jerusalem. Let this be known to you, and listen to my words. 
    15: These people are not drunk, as you suppose, for it is only nine o’clock in the morning. 
    16: No, this is what was spoken through the prophet Joel:

    17: 
‘It will come to pass in the last days,’ God says,
    ‘that I will pour out a portion of my spirit
    upon all flesh.
Your sons and your daughters shall prophesy,
    your young men shall see visions,
    your old men shall dream dreams.

    18: 
Indeed, upon my servants and my handmaids
    I will pour out a portion of my spirit in those days,
        and they shall prophesy.

    19: 
And I will work wonders in the heavens above
    and signs on the earth below:
        blood, fire, and a cloud of smoke.

    20: 
The sun shall be turned to darkness,
    and the moon to blood,
        before the coming of the great and splendid day of the Lord,

    21: 
and it shall be that everyone shall be saved who calls on the name of the Lord.’

    22: You who are Israelites, hear these words. Jesus the Nazorean was a man commended to you by God with mighty deeds, wonders, and signs, which God worked through him in your midst, as you yourselves know. 
    23: This man, delivered up by the set plan and foreknowledge of God, you killed, using lawless men to crucify him. 
    24: But God raised him up, releasing him from the throes of death, because it was impossible for him to be held by it. 
    25: For David says of him:
‘I saw the Lord ever before me,
    with him at my right hand I shall not be disturbed.

    26: 
Therefore my heart has been glad and my tongue has exulted;
    my flesh, too, will dwell in hope,

    27: 
because you will not abandon my soul to the netherworld,
    nor will you suffer your holy one to see corruption.

    28: 
You have made known to me the paths of life;
    you will fill me with joy in your presence.’

    29: My brothers, one can confidently say to you about the patriarch David that he died and was buried, and his tomb is in our midst to this day. 
    30: But since he was a prophet and knew that God had sworn an oath to him that he would set one of his descendants upon his throne, 
    31: he foresaw and spoke of the resurrection of the Messiah, that neither was he abandoned to the netherworld nor did his flesh see corruption. 
    32: God raised this Jesus; of this we are all witnesses. 
    33: Exalted at the right hand of God, he received the promise of the holy Spirit from the Father and poured it forth, as you [both] see and hear. 
    34: For David did not go up into heaven, but he himself said:
‘The Lord said to my Lord,
“Sit at my right hand

    35: 
    until I make your enemies your footstool.”’

    36: Therefore let the whole house of Israel know for certain that God has made him both Lord and Messiah, this Jesus whom you crucified.”

    37: Now when they heard this, they were cut to the heart, and they asked Peter and the other apostles, “What are we to do, my brothers?” 
    38: Peter  to them, “Repent and be baptized,[g] every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of your sins; and you will receive the gift of the holy Spirit. 
    39: For the promise is made to you and to your children and to all those far off, whomever the Lord our God will call.” 
    40: He testified with many other arguments, and was exhorting them, “Save yourselves from this corrupt generation.” 
    41: Those who accepted his message were baptized, and about three thousand persons were added that day.
Communal Life. 
    42: They devoted themselves to the teaching of the apostles and to the communal life, to the breaking of the bread and to the prayers. 
    43: Awe came upon everyone, and many wonders and signs were done through the apostles. 
    44: All who believed were together and had all things in common; 
    45: they would sell their property and possessions and divide them among all according to each one’s need. 
    46: Every day they devoted themselves to meeting together in the temple area and to breaking bread in their homes. They ate their meals with exultation and sincerity of heart, 
    47: praising God and enjoying favor with all the people. And every day the Lord added to their number those who were being saved.


  Chapter 3.

    1: Now Peter and John were going up to the temple area for the three o’clock hour of prayer.[b] 
    2: 
    3: Cure of a Crippled Beggar. 1 Now Peter and John were going up to the temple area for the three o’clock hour of prayer.[b] 2 And a man crippled from birth was carried and placed at the gate of the temple called “the Beautiful Gate” every day to beg for alms from the people who entered the temple. 3 When he saw Peter and John about to go into the temple, he asked for alms. 
    4: But Peter looked intently at him, as did John, and said, “Look at us.” 
    5: He paid attention to them, expecting to receive something from them. 
    6: Peter said, “I have neither silver nor gold, but what I do have I give you: in the name of Jesus Christ the Nazorean, [rise and] walk.” 
    7: Then Peter took him by the right hand and raised him up, and immediately his feet and ankles grew strong. 
    8: He leaped up, stood, and walked around, and went into the temple with them, walking and jumping and praising God. 
    9: hen all the people saw him walking and praising God, 
    10: they recognized him as the one who used to sit begging at the Beautiful Gate of the temple, and they were filled with amazement and astonishment at what had happened to him.
Peter’s Speech. 
    11: As he clung to Peter and John, all the people hurried in amazement toward them in the portico called “Solomon’s Portico.” 
    12: When Peter saw this, he addressed the people, “You Israelites, why are you amazed at this, and why do you look so intently at us as if we had made him walk by our own power or piety? 
    13: The God of Abraham,  of Isaac, and  of Jacob, the God of our ancestors, has glorified[d] his servant Jesus whom you handed over and denied in Pilate’s presence, when he had decided to release him. 
    14: You denied the Holy and Righteous One and asked that a murderer be released to you. 
    15: The author of life you put to death, but God raised him from the dead; of this we are witnesses. 
    16: And by faith in his name, this man, whom you see and know, his name has made strong, and the faith that comes through it has given him this perfect health, in the presence of all of you. 
    17: Now I know, brothers, that you acted out of ignorance, just as your leaders did; 
    18: but God has thus brought to fulfillment what he had announced beforehand through the mouth of all the prophets, that his Messiah would suffer. 
    19: Repent, therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be wiped away, 
    20: and that the Lord may grant you times of refreshment and send you the Messiah already appointed for you, Jesus, 
    21: whom heaven must receive until the times of universal restoration of which God spoke through the mouth of his holy prophets from of old. 
    22: For Moses said:
‘A prophet like me will the Lord, your God, raise up for you
    from among your own kinsmen;
to him you shall listen in all that he may say to you.

    23: 
Everyone who does not listen to that prophet
    will be cut off from the people.’

    24: Moreover, all the prophets who spoke, from Samuel and those afterwards, also announced these days. 
    25: You are the children of the prophets and of the covenant that God made with your ancestors when he said to Abraham, ‘In your offspring all the families of the earth shall be blessed.’ 
    26: For you first, God raised up his servant and sent him to bless you by turning each of you from your evil ways.”


  Chapter 4.

    1: While they were still speaking to the people, the priests, the captain of the temple guard, and the Sadducees confronted them, 
    2: disturbed that they were teaching the people and proclaiming in Jesus the resurrection of the dead. 
    3: 
    4: 1 While they were still speaking to the people, the priests, the captain of the temple guard, and the Sadducees confronted them, 2 disturbed that they were teaching the people and proclaiming in Jesus the resurrection of the dead. 3 They laid hands on them and put them in custody until the next day, since it was already evening. 4 But many of those who heard the word came to believe and [the] number of men grew to [about] five thousand.
Before the Sanhedrin. 
    5: On the next day, their leaders, elders, and scribes were assembled in Jerusalem, 
    6: with Annas the high priest, Caiaphas, John, Alexander, and all who were of the high-priestly class. 
    7: They brought them into their presence and questioned them, “By what power or by what name have you done this?” 
    8: Then Peter, filled with the holy Spirit, answered them, “Leaders of the people and elders: 
    9: f we are being examined today about a good deed done to a cripple, namely, by what means he was saved, 
    10: then all of you and all the people of Israel should know that it was in the name of Jesus Christ the Nazorean whom you crucified, whom God raised from the dead; in his name this man stands before you healed. 
    11: He is ‘the stone rejected by you, the builders, which has become the cornerstone.’ 
    12: There is no salvation through anyone else, nor is there any other name under heaven given to the human race by which we are to be saved.”

    13: Observing the boldness of Peter and John and perceiving them to be uneducated, ordinary men, they were amazed, and they recognized them as the companions of Jesus. 
    14: Then when they saw the man who had been cured standing there with them, they could say nothing in reply. 
    15: So they ordered them to leave the Sanhedrin, and conferred with one another, saying, 
    16: “What are we to do with these men? Everyone living in Jerusalem knows that a remarkable sign was done through them, and we cannot deny it. 
    17: But so that it may not be spread any further among the people, let us give them a stern warning never again to speak to anyone in this name.”

    18: So they called them back and ordered them not to speak or teach at all in the name of Jesus. 
    19: Peter and John, however, said to them in reply, “Whether it is right in the sight of God for us to obey you rather than God, you be the judges. 
    20: It is impossible for us not to speak about what we have seen and heard.” 
    21: After threatening them further, they released them, finding no way to punish them, on account of the people who were all praising God for what had happened. 
    22: For the man on whom this sign of healing had been done was over forty years old.
Prayer of the Community. 
    23: After their release they went back to their own people and reported what the chief priests and elders had told them. 
    24: And when they heard it, they raised their voices to God with one accord and said, “Sovereign Lord, maker of heaven and earth and the sea and all that is in them, 
    25: you said by the holy Spirit through the mouth of our father David, your servant:
‘Why did the Gentiles rage
    and the peoples entertain folly?

    26: 
The kings of the earth took their stand
    and the princes gathered together
        against the Lord and against his anointed.’

    27: Indeed they gathered in this city against your holy servant Jesus whom you anointed, Herod and Pontius Pilate, together with the Gentiles and the peoples of Israel, 
    28: to do what your hand and  will had long ago planned to take place. 
    29: And now, Lord, take note of their threats, and enable your servants to speak your word with all boldness, 
    30: as you stretch forth  hand to heal, and signs and wonders are done through the name of your holy servant Jesus.” 
    31: As they prayed, the place where they were gathered shook, and they were all filled with the holy Spirit and continued to speak the word of God with boldness.
Life in the Christian Community.[f] 
    32: The community of believers was of one heart and mind, and no one claimed that any of his possessions was his own, but they had everything in common. 
    33: With great power the apostles bore witness to the resurrection of the Lord Jesus, and great favor was accorded them all. 
    34: There was no needy person among them, for those who owned property or houses would sell them, bring the proceeds of the sale, 
    35: and put them at the feet of the apostles, and they were distributed to each according to need.

    36: Thus Joseph, also named by the apostles Barnabas (which is translated “son of encouragement”), a Levite, a Cypriot by birth, 
    37: sold a piece of property that he owned, then brought the money and put it at the feet of the apostles.


End of day 306.