Day 92:

Reading 1-Chronicles, chapters ['13', '14', '15', '16']:

  Chapter 13.

    1: 
Transfer of the Ark. 1 After David had taken counsel with his commanders of thousands and of hundreds, that is, with every leader, 
    2: 
    3: Transfer of the Ark. 1 After David had taken counsel with his commanders of thousands and of hundreds, that is, with every leader, 2 he said to the whole assembly of Israel: “If it seems good to you, and is so decreed by the Lord our God, let us send to the rest of our kindred from all the districts of Israel, and also the priests and the Levites from their cities with pasture lands, that they may join us; 3 and let us bring the ark of our God here among us, for in the days of Saul we did not consult it.” 
    4: And the whole assembly agreed to do it, for it seemed right in the eyes of all the people.

    5: Then David assembled all Israel, from Shihor of Egypt to Lebo-hamath, to bring the ark of God from Kiriath-jearim. 
    6: David and all Israel went up to Baalah, that is, to Kiriath-jearim, of Judah, to bring up from there the ark of God, which was known by the name “Lord enthroned upon the cherubim.” 
    7: They transported the ark of God on a new cart from the house of Abinadab; Uzzah and Ahio were guiding the cart, 
    8: while David and all Israel danced before God with all their might, with singing, and with lyres, harps, tambourines, cymbals, and trumpets.

    9: s they reached the threshing floor of Chidon, Uzzah stretched out his hand to steady the ark, for the oxen were tipping it. 
    10: Then the Lord became angry with Uzzah and struck him, because he had laid his hand on the ark; he died there in God’s presence. 
    11: David was angry because the Lord’s anger had broken out against Uzzah. Therefore that place has been called Perez-uzzah even to this day.

    12: 
    13: Transfer of the Ark. 1 After David had taken counsel with his commanders of thousands and of hundreds, that is, with every leader, 2 he said to the whole assembly of Israel: “If it seems good to you, and is so decreed by the Lord our God, let us send to the rest of our kindred from all the districts of Israel, and also the priests and the Levites from their cities with pasture lands, that they may join us; 3 and let us bring the ark of our God here among us, for in the days of Saul we did not consult it.” 4 And the whole assembly agreed to do it, for it seemed right in the eyes of all the people.
5 Then David assembled all Israel, from Shihor of Egypt to Lebo-hamath, to bring the ark of God from Kiriath-jearim. 6 David and all Israel went up to Baalah, that is, to Kiriath-jearim, of Judah, to bring up from there the ark of God, which was known by the name “Lord enthroned upon the cherubim.” 7 They transported the ark of God on a new cart from the house of Abinadab; Uzzah and Ahio were guiding the cart, 8 while David and all Israel danced before God with all their might, with singing, and with lyres, harps, tambourines, cymbals, and trumpets.
9 As they reached the threshing floor of Chidon,[b] Uzzah stretched out his hand to steady the ark, for the oxen were tipping it. 10 Then the Lord became angry with Uzzah and struck him, because he had laid his hand on the ark; he died there in God’s presence. 11 David was angry because the Lord’s anger had broken out against Uzzah. Therefore that place has been called Perez-uzzah[c] even to this day.
12 David was afraid of God that day, and he said, “How can I bring in the ark of God to me?” 13 Therefore he did not take the ark with him into the City of David, but deposited it instead at the house of Obed-edom the Gittite. 
    14: The ark of God remained in the house of Obed-edom with his family for three months, and the Lord blessed Obed-edom’s household and all that he possessed.


  Chapter 14.

    1: 
David in Jerusalem. 1 Hiram, king of Tyre, sent envoys to David along with cedar wood, and masons and carpenters to build him a house. 
    2: David now knew that the Lord had truly established him as king over Israel, for his kingdom was greatly exalted for the sake of his people Israel. 
    3: 
    4: David in Jerusalem. 1 Hiram, king of Tyre, sent envoys to David along with cedar wood, and masons and carpenters to build him a house. 2 David now knew[b] that the Lord had truly established him as king over Israel, for his kingdom was greatly exalted for the sake of his people Israel. 3 David took other wives in Jerusalem and became the father of more sons and daughters. 4 These are the names of those who were born to him in Jerusalem: Shammua, Shobab, Nathan, Solomon, 
    5: Ibhar, Elishua, Elpelet, 
    6: Nogah, Nepheg, Japhia, 
    7: Elishama, Beeliada, and Eliphelet.
The Philistine Wars. 
    8: When the Philistines had heard that David was anointed king over all Israel, they marched out in force looking for him. But when David heard of this, he went out against them. 
    9: eanwhile the Philistines had come and raided the valley of Rephaim. 
    10: David inquired of God, “Shall I attack the Philistines, and will you deliver them into my power?” The Lord answered him, “Attack, for I have delivered them into your power.” 
    11: So they attacked, at Baal-perazim, and David defeated them there. Then David said, “By my hand God has broken through my enemies just as water breaks through a dam.” Therefore that place was called Baal-perazim. 
    12: The Philistines abandoned their gods there, and David ordered them to be burnt.

    13: 
    14: David in Jerusalem. 1 Hiram, king of Tyre, sent envoys to David along with cedar wood, and masons and carpenters to build him a house. 2 David now knew[b] that the Lord had truly established him as king over Israel, for his kingdom was greatly exalted for the sake of his people Israel. 3 David took other wives in Jerusalem and became the father of more sons and daughters. 4 These are the names of those who were born to him in Jerusalem: Shammua, Shobab, Nathan, Solomon, 5 Ibhar, Elishua, Elpelet, 6 Nogah, Nepheg, Japhia, 7 Elishama, Beeliada, and Eliphelet.
The Philistine Wars. 8 When the Philistines had heard that David was anointed king over all Israel, they marched out in force looking for him. But when David heard of this, he went out against them. 9 Meanwhile the Philistines had come and raided the valley of Rephaim. 10 David inquired of God, “Shall I attack the Philistines, and will you deliver them into my power?” The Lord answered him, “Attack, for I have delivered them into your power.” 11 So they attacked, at Baal-perazim, and David defeated them there. Then David said, “By my hand God has broken through my enemies just as water breaks through a dam.” Therefore that place was called Baal-perazim.[c] 12 The Philistines abandoned their gods there, and David ordered them to be burnt.
13 Once again the Philistines raided the valley, 14 and again David inquired of God. But God answered him: Do not try to pursue them, but go around them and come against them near the balsam trees. 
    15: When you hear the sound of marching in the tops of the balsam trees, then go forth to battle, for God has already gone before you to strike the army of the Philistines. 
    16: David did as God commanded him, and they routed the Philistine army from Gibeon to Gezer.

    17: Thus David’s fame was spread abroad through every land, and the Lord put the fear of him on all the nations.


  Chapter 15.

    1: 
Preparations for Moving the Ark. 1 David built houses for himself in the City of David and prepared a place for the ark of God, pitching a tent for it there. 
    2: At that time he said, “No one may carry the ark of God except the Levites, for the Lord chose them to carry the ark of the Lord and to minister to him forever.” 
    3: Then David assembled all Israel to Jerusalem to bring up the ark of the Lord to its place, which he had prepared for it. 
    4: 
    5: Preparations for Moving the Ark. 1 David built houses for himself in the City of David and prepared a place for the ark of God, pitching a tent for it there. 2 At that time he said, “No one may carry the ark of God except the Levites, for the Lord chose them to carry the ark of the Lord and to minister to him forever.” 3 Then David assembled all Israel to Jerusalem to bring up the ark of the Lord to its place, which he had prepared for it. 4 David also convened the sons of Aaron and the Levites: 5 of the sons of Kohath, Uriel, their chief, and one hundred and twenty of his brothers; 
    6: of the sons of Merari, Asaiah, their chief, and two hundred and twenty of his brothers; 
    7: of the sons of Gershon, Joel, their chief, and one hundred and thirty of his brothers; 
    8: of the sons of Elizaphan, Shemaiah, their chief, and two hundred of his brothers; 
    9: f the sons of Hebron, Eliel, their chief, and eighty of his brothers; 
    10: of the sons of Uzziel, Amminadab, their chief, and one hundred and twelve of his brothers.

    11: David summoned the priests Zadok and Abiathar, and the Levites Uriel, Asaiah, Joel, Shemaiah, Eliel, and Amminadab, 
    12: and said to them: “You heads of the levitical houses, sanctify yourselves along with your brothers to bring up the ark of the Lord, the God of Israel, to the place which I have prepared for it. 
    13: Because you were not with us the first time, the Lord our God broke out against us, for we did not seek him aright.” 
    14: 
    15: Preparations for Moving the Ark. 1 David built houses for himself in the City of David and prepared a place for the ark of God, pitching a tent for it there. 2 At that time he said, “No one may carry the ark of God except the Levites, for the Lord chose them to carry the ark of the Lord and to minister to him forever.” 3 Then David assembled all Israel to Jerusalem to bring up the ark of the Lord to its place, which he had prepared for it. 4 David also convened the sons of Aaron and the Levites: 5 of the sons of Kohath, Uriel, their chief, and one hundred and twenty of his brothers; 6 of the sons of Merari, Asaiah, their chief, and two hundred and twenty of his brothers; 7 of the sons of Gershon, Joel, their chief, and one hundred and thirty of his brothers; 8 of the sons of Elizaphan, Shemaiah, their chief, and two hundred of his brothers; 9 of the sons of Hebron, Eliel, their chief, and eighty of his brothers; 10 of the sons of Uzziel, Amminadab, their chief, and one hundred and twelve of his brothers.
11 David summoned the priests Zadok and Abiathar, and the Levites Uriel, Asaiah, Joel, Shemaiah, Eliel, and Amminadab, 12 and said to them: “You heads of the levitical houses, sanctify yourselves along with your brothers to bring up the ark of the Lord, the God of Israel, to the place which I have prepared for it. 13 Because you were not with us the first time, the Lord our God broke out against us, for we did not seek him aright.” 14 Accordingly, the priests and the Levites sanctified themselves to bring up the ark of the Lord, the God of Israel. 15 The Levites carried the ark of God on their shoulders with poles, as Moses had commanded according to the word of the Lord.

    16: David commanded the commanders of the Levites to appoint their brothers as singers and to play on musical instruments, harps, lyres, and cymbals, to make a loud sound of rejoicing. 
    17: Therefore the Levites appointed Heman, son of Joel, and, among his brothers, Asaph, son of Berechiah; and among the sons of Merari, their brothers, Ethan, son of Kushaiah; 
    18: and, together with these, their brothers of the second rank: the gatekeepers Zechariah, Uzziel, Shemiramoth, Jehiel, Unni, Eliab, Benaiah, Maaseiah, Mattithiah, Eliphelehu, Mikneiah, Obed-edom, and Jeiel. 
    19: The singers, Heman, Asaph, and Ethan, sounded brass cymbals. 
    20: Zechariah, Uzziel, Shemiramoth, Jehiel, Unni, Eliab, Maaseiah, and Benaiah played on harps set to “Alamoth.” 
    21: But Mattithiah, Eliphelehu, Mikneiah, Obed-edom, and Jeiel led the song on lyres set to “sheminith.” 
    22: Chenaniah was the chief of the Levites in the singing; he directed the singing, for he was skillful. 
    23: Berechiah and Elkanah were gatekeepers before the ark. 
    24: The priests, Shebaniah, Joshaphat, Nethanel, Amasai, Zechariah, Benaiah, and Eliezer, sounded the trumpets before the ark of God. Obed-edom and Jeiel were also gatekeepers before the ark.
The Ark Comes to Jerusalem. 
    25: Thus David, the elders of Israel, and the commanders of thousands went to bring up the ark of the covenant of the Lord with joy from the house of Obed-edom. 
    26: While God helped the Levites to carry the ark of the covenant of the Lord, they sacrificed seven bulls and seven rams. 
    27: David was vested in a robe of fine linen, as were all the Levites who carried the ark, the singers, and Chenaniah, the leader of song; David was also wearing a linen ephod. 
    28: Thus all Israel brought up the ark of the covenant of the Lord with joyful shouting, to the sound of horns, trumpets, and cymbals, and the music of harps and lyres. 
    29: But as the ark of the covenant of the Lord was entering the City of David, Michal, daughter of Saul, looked down from her window, and when she saw King David leaping and dancing, she despised him in her heart.


  Chapter 16.

    1: 
1 They brought in the ark of God and set it within the tent which David had pitched for it. Then they sacrificed burnt offerings and communion offerings to God. 
    2: When David had finished sacrificing the burnt offerings and communion offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the Lord, 
    3: and distributed to every Israelite, to every man and every woman, a loaf of bread, a piece of meat, and a raisin cake.
David’s Directives for the Levites. 
    4: He then appointed certain Levites to minister before the ark of the Lord, to celebrate, thank, and praise the Lord, the God of Israel. 
    5: 
    6: 1 They brought in the ark of God and set it within the tent which David had pitched for it. Then they sacrificed burnt offerings and communion offerings to God. 2 When David had finished sacrificing the burnt offerings and communion offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the Lord, 3 and distributed to every Israelite, to every man and every woman, a loaf of bread, a piece of meat, and a raisin cake.
David’s Directives for the Levites. 4 He then appointed certain Levites to minister before the ark of the Lord, to celebrate, thank, and praise the Lord, the God of Israel. 5 Asaph was their chief, and second to him were Zechariah, Uzziel, Shemiramoth, Jehiel, Mattithiah, Eliab, Benaiah, Obed-edom, and Jeiel. These were to play on harps and lyres, while Asaph was to sound the cymbals, 6 and the priests Benaiah and Jahaziel were to be the regular trumpeters before the ark of the covenant of God.

    7: On that same day, David appointed Asaph and his brothers to sing for the first time these praises of the Lord:

    8: 
Give thanks to the Lord, invoke his name;
    make known among the peoples his deeds.

    9: Sing praise, play music;
    proclaim all his wondrous deeds.

    10: 
Glory in his holy name;
    rejoice, O hearts that seek the Lord!

    11: 
Rely on the mighty Lord;
    constantly seek his face.

    12: 
Recall the wondrous deeds he has done,
    his signs, and his words of judgment,

    13: 
You sons of Israel, his servants,
    offspring of Jacob, the chosen ones!

    14: 
The Lord is our God;
    who rules the whole earth.

    15: 
    16: 1 They brought in the ark of God and set it within the tent which David had pitched for it. Then they sacrificed burnt offerings and communion offerings to God. 2 When David had finished sacrificing the burnt offerings and communion offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the Lord, 3 and distributed to every Israelite, to every man and every woman, a loaf of bread, a piece of meat, and a raisin cake.
David’s Directives for the Levites. 4 He then appointed certain Levites to minister before the ark of the Lord, to celebrate, thank, and praise the Lord, the God of Israel. 5 Asaph was their chief, and second to him were Zechariah, Uzziel, Shemiramoth, Jehiel, Mattithiah, Eliab, Benaiah, Obed-edom, and Jeiel. These were to play on harps and lyres, while Asaph was to sound the cymbals, 6 and the priests Benaiah and Jahaziel were to be the regular trumpeters before the ark of the covenant of God.
7 On that same day, David appointed Asaph and his brothers to sing for the first time these praises of the Lord:
8 
Give thanks to the Lord, invoke his name;
    make known among the peoples his deeds.
9 
Sing praise, play music;
    proclaim all his wondrous deeds.
10 
Glory in his holy name;
    rejoice, O hearts that seek the Lord!
11 
Rely on the mighty Lord;
    constantly seek his face.
12 
Recall the wondrous deeds he has done,
    his signs, and his words of judgment,
13 
You sons of Israel, his servants,
    offspring of Jacob, the chosen ones!
14 
The Lord is our God;
    who rules the whole earth.
15 
He remembers forever his covenant
    the pact imposed for a thousand generations—
16 
Which was made with Abraham,
    confirmed by oath to Isaac,

    17: 
And ratified as binding for Jacob,
    an everlasting covenant for Israel:

    18: 
“To you will I give the land of Canaan,
    your own allotted heritage.”

    19: 
When they were few in number,
    a handful, and strangers there,

    20: 
Wandering from nation to nation,
    from one kingdom to another,

    21: 
He let no one oppress them;
    for their sake he rebuked kings:

    22: 
“Do not touch my anointed,
    to my prophets do no harm.”

    23: 
Sing to the Lord, all the earth,
    announce his salvation, day after day.

    24: 
Tell his glory among the nations;
    among all peoples, his wondrous deeds.

    25: 
For great is the Lord and highly to be praised;
    to be feared above all gods.

    26: 
For the gods of the nations all do nothing,
    but the Lord made the heavens.

    27: 
Splendor and majesty go before him;
    power and rejoicing are in his holy place.

    28: 
Give to the Lord, you families of nations,
    give to the Lord glory and might;

    29: 
Give to the Lord the glory due his name!
Bring gifts, and come before him;
    bow down to the Lord, splendid in holiness.

    30: 
Tremble before him, all the earth;
    the world will surely stand fast, never to be moved.

    31: 
Let the heavens be glad and the earth rejoice;
    let them say among the nations: The Lord is king.

    32: 
Let the sea and what fills it resound;
    let the plains be joyful and all that is in them!

    33: 
Then let all the trees of the forest exult
    before the Lord, who comes,
    who comes to rule the earth.

    34: 
Give thanks to the Lord, who is good,
    whose love endures forever;

    35: 
And say, “Save us, O God, our savior,
    gather us and deliver us from among the nations,
That we may give thanks to your holy name
    and glory in praising you.”

    36: 
Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel,
    from everlasting to everlasting!
Let all the people say, Amen! Hallelujah.

    37: Then David left Asaph and his brothers there before the ark of the covenant of the Lord to minister before the ark regularly according to the daily ritual; 
    38: he also left there Obed-edom and sixty-eight of his brothers, including Obed-edom, son of Jeduthun, and Hosah, to be gatekeepers.

    39: But the priest Zadok and his priestly brothers he left before the tabernacle of the Lord on the high place at Gibeon, 
    40: to make burnt offerings to the Lord on the altar for burnt offerings regularly, morning and evening, and to do all that is written in the law of the Lord which he commanded Israel. 
    41: With them were Heman and Jeduthun and the others who were chosen and designated by name to give thanks to the Lord, “whose love endures forever,” 
    42: with trumpets and cymbals for accompaniment, and instruments for sacred song. The sons of Jeduthun kept the gate.

    43: Then all the people departed, each to their own homes, and David returned to bless his household.


End of day 92.