Day 341:

Reading Hebrews, chapters ['9', '10', '11', '12']:

  Chapter 9.

    1: Now  the first covenant had regulations for worship and an earthly sanctuary. 
    2: For a tabernacle was constructed, the outer one, in which were the lampstand, the table, and the bread of offering; this is called the Holy Place. 
    3: Behind the second veil was the tabernacle called the Holy of Holies, 
    4: in which were the gold altar of incense and the ark of the covenant entirely covered with gold. In it were the gold jar containing the manna, the staff of Aaron that had sprouted, and the tablets of the covenant. 
    5: Above it were the cherubim of glory overshadowing the place of expiation. Now is not the time to speak of these in detail.

    6: With these arrangements for worship, the priests, in performing their service, go into the outer tabernacle repeatedly, 
    7: but the high priest alone goes into the inner one once a year, not without blood that he offers for himself and for the sins of the people. 
    8: 
    9: he Worship of the First Covenant. 1 Now [even] the first covenant had regulations for worship and an earthly sanctuary. 2 For a tabernacle was constructed, the outer one,[b] in which were the lampstand, the table, and the bread of offering; this is called the Holy Place. 3 [c]Behind the second veil was the tabernacle called the Holy of Holies, 4 in which were the gold altar of incense[d] and the ark of the covenant entirely covered with gold. In it were the gold jar containing the manna, the staff of Aaron that had sprouted, and the tablets of the covenant. 5 [e]Above it were the cherubim of glory overshadowing the place of expiation. Now is not the time to speak of these in detail.
6 With these arrangements for worship, the priests, in performing their service,[f] go into the outer tabernacle repeatedly, 7 but the high priest alone goes into the inner one once a year, not without blood[g] that he offers for himself and for the sins of the people. 8 In this way the holy Spirit shows that the way into the sanctuary had not yet been revealed while the outer tabernacle still had its place. 9 This is a symbol of the present time,[h] in which gifts and sacrifices are offered that cannot perfect the worshiper in conscience 
    10: but only in matters of food and drink and various ritual washings: regulations concerning the flesh, imposed until the time of the new order.
Sacrifice of Jesus. 
    11: But when Christ came as high priest of the good things that have come to be,[j] passing through the greater and more perfect tabernacle not made by hands, that is, not belonging to this creation, 
    12: he entered once for all into the sanctuary, not with the blood of goats and calves but with his own blood, thus obtaining eternal redemption. 
    13: For if the blood of goats and bulls and the sprinkling of a heifer’s ashes can sanctify those who are defiled so that their flesh is cleansed, 
    14: how much more will the blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit offered himself unblemished to God, cleanse our consciences from dead works to worship the living God.

    15: For this reason he is mediator of a new covenant: since a death has taken place for deliverance from transgressions under the first covenant, those who are called may receive the promised eternal inheritance. 
    16: Now where there is a will, the death of the testator must be established. 
    17: For a will takes effect only at death; it has no force while the testator is alive. 
    18: Thus not even the first covenant was inaugurated without blood. 
    19: When every commandment had been proclaimed by Moses to all the people according to the law, he took the blood of calves [and goats], together with water and crimson wool and hyssop, and sprinkled both the book itself and all the people, 
    20: saying, “This is ‘the blood of the covenant which God has enjoined upon you.’” 
    21: In the same way, he sprinkled also the tabernacle and all the vessels of worship with blood. 
    22: According to the law almost everything is purified by blood, and without the shedding of blood there is no forgiveness.

    23: Therefore, it was necessary for the copies of the heavenly things to be purified by these rites, but the heavenly things themselves by better sacrifices than these. 
    24: For Christ did not enter into a sanctuary made by hands, a copy of the true one, but heaven itself, that he might now appear before God on our behalf. 
    25: Not that he might offer himself repeatedly, as the high priest enters each year into the sanctuary with blood that is not his own; 
    26: if that were so, he would have had to suffer repeatedly from the foundation of the world. But now once for all he has appeared at the end of the ages to take away sin by his sacrifice. 
    27: Just as it is appointed that human beings die once, and after this the judgment, 
    28: so also Christ, offered once to take away the sins of many, will appear a second time, not to take away sin but to bring salvation to those who eagerly await him.


  Chapter 10.

    1: 
One Sacrifice Instead of Many. 1 Since the law has only a shadow of the good things to come,[b] and not the very image of them, it can never make perfect those who come to worship by the same sacrifices that they offer continually each year. 
    2: Otherwise, would not the sacrifices have ceased to be offered, since the worshipers, once cleansed, would no longer have had any consciousness of sins? 
    3: But in those sacrifices there is only a yearly remembrance of sins, 
    4: for it is impossible that the blood of bulls and goats take away sins. 
    5: For this reason, when he came into the world, he said:
“Sacrifice and offering you did not desire,
    but a body you prepared for me;

    6: 
holocausts and sin offerings you took no delight in.

    7: 
Then I said, ‘As is written of me in the scroll,
    Behold, I come to do your will, O God.’”

    8: First he says, “Sacrifices and offerings, holocausts and sin offerings, you neither desired nor delighted in.” These are offered according to the law. 
    9: 
    10: One Sacrifice Instead of Many. 1 Since the law has only a shadow of the good things to come,[b] and not the very image of them, it can never make perfect those who come to worship by the same sacrifices that they offer continually each year. 2 Otherwise, would not the sacrifices have ceased to be offered, since the worshipers, once cleansed, would no longer have had any consciousness of sins? 3 But in those sacrifices there is only a yearly remembrance of sins, 4 for it is impossible that the blood of bulls and goats take away sins. 5 For this reason, when he came into the world, he said:[c]
“Sacrifice and offering you did not desire,
    but a body you prepared for me;
6 
holocausts and sin offerings you took no delight in.
7 
Then I said, ‘As is written of me in the scroll,
    Behold, I come to do your will, O God.’”
8 First he says, “Sacrifices and offerings, holocausts and sin offerings,[d] you neither desired nor delighted in.” These are offered according to the law. 9 Then he says, “Behold, I come to do your will.” He takes away the first to establish the second. 10 By this “will,” we have been consecrated through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all.

    11: Every priest stands daily at his ministry, offering frequently those same sacrifices that can never take away sins. 
    12: But this one offered one sacrifice for sins, and took his seat forever at the right hand of God; 
    13: now he waits until his enemies are made his footstool. 
    14: For by one offering he has made perfect forever those who are being consecrated. 
    15: The holy Spirit also testifies to us, for after saying:

    16: 
“This is the covenant I will establish with them after those days, says the Lord:
    ‘I will put my laws in their hearts,
    and I will write them upon their minds,’”

    17: he also says:
“Their sins and their evildoing
    I will remember no more.”

    18: Where there is forgiveness of these, there is no longer offering for sin.
Recalling the Past. 
    19: Therefore, brothers, since through the blood of Jesus we have confidence of entrance into the sanctuary 
    20: by the new and living way he opened for us through the veil, that is, his flesh, 
    21: and since we have “a great priest over the house of God,” 
    22: let us approach with a sincere heart and in absolute trust, with our hearts sprinkled clean from an evil conscience and our bodies washed in pure water. 
    23: Let us hold unwaveringly to our confession that gives us hope, for he who made the promise is trustworthy. 
    24: We must consider how to rouse one another to love and good works. 
    25: We should not stay away from our assembly, as is the custom of some, but encourage one another, and this all the more as you see the day drawing near.

    26: If we sin deliberately after receiving knowledge of the truth, there no longer remains sacrifice for sins 
    27: but a fearful prospect of judgment and a flaming fire that is going to consume the adversaries. 
    28: Anyone who rejects the law of Moses is put to death without pity on the testimony of two or three witnesses. 
    29: Do you not think that a much worse punishment is due the one who has contempt for the Son of God, considers unclean the covenant-blood by which he was consecrated, and insults the spirit of grace? 
    30: We know the one who said:
“Vengeance is mine; I will repay,”
and again:
“The Lord will judge his people.”

    31: It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

    32: Remember the days past when, after you had been enlightened, you endured a great contest of suffering. 
    33: At times you were publicly exposed to abuse and affliction; at other times you associated yourselves with those so treated. 
    34: You even joined in the sufferings of those in prison and joyfully accepted the confiscation of your property, knowing that you had a better and lasting possession. 
    35: Therefore, do not throw away your confidence; it will have great recompense. 
    36: You need endurance to do the will of God and receive what he has promised.

    37: 
“For, after just a brief moment,
    he who is to come shall come;
    he shall not delay.

    38: 
But my just one shall live by faith,
    and if he draws back I take no pleasure in him.”

    39: We are not among those who draw back and perish, but among those who have faith and will possess life.


  Chapter 11.

    1: 
Faith of the Ancients. 1 Faith is the realization of what is hoped for and evidence[b] of things not seen. 
    2: Because of it the ancients were well attested. 
    3: By faith we understand that the universe was ordered by the word of God, so that what is visible came into being through the invisible. 
    4: By faith Abel offered to God a sacrifice greater than Cain’s. Through this he was attested to be righteous, God bearing witness to his gifts, and through this, though dead, he still speaks. 
    5: By faith Enoch was taken up so that he should not see death, and “he was found no more because God had taken him.” Before he was taken up, he was attested to have pleased God. 
    6: But without faith it is impossible to please him, for anyone who approaches God must believe that he exists and that he rewards those who seek him. 
    7: By faith Noah, warned about what was not yet seen, with reverence built an ark for the salvation of his household. Through this he condemned the world and inherited the righteousness that comes through faith.

    8: By faith Abraham obeyed when he was called to go out to a place that he was to receive as an inheritance; he went out, not knowing where he was to go. 
    9: y faith he sojourned in the promised land as in a foreign country, dwelling in tents with Isaac and Jacob, heirs of the same promise; 
    10: 
    11: a]
Faith of the Ancients. 1 Faith is the realization of what is hoped for and evidence[b] of things not seen. 2 Because of it the ancients were well attested. 3 By faith we understand that the universe was ordered by the word of God,[c] so that what is visible came into being through the invisible. 4 [d]By faith Abel offered to God a sacrifice greater than Cain’s. Through this he was attested to be righteous, God bearing witness to his gifts, and through this, though dead, he still speaks. 5 By faith Enoch was taken up so that he should not see death, and “he was found no more because God had taken him.” Before he was taken up, he was attested to have pleased God. 6 [e]But without faith it is impossible to please him, for anyone who approaches God must believe that he exists and that he rewards those who seek him. 7 By faith Noah, warned about what was not yet seen, with reverence built an ark for the salvation of his household. Through this he condemned the world and inherited the righteousness that comes through faith.
8 By faith Abraham obeyed when he was called to go out to a place that he was to receive as an inheritance; he went out, not knowing where he was to go. 9 By faith he sojourned in the promised land as in a foreign country, dwelling in tents with Isaac and Jacob, heirs of the same promise; 10 for he was looking forward to the city with foundations, whose architect and maker is God. 11 By faith he received power to generate, even though he was past the normal age—and Sarah herself was sterile—for he thought that the one who had made the promise was trustworthy. 
    12: So it was that there came forth from one man, himself as good as dead, descendants as numerous as the stars in the sky and as countless as the sands on the seashore.

    13: All these died in faith. They did not receive what had been promised but saw it and greeted it from afar and acknowledged themselves to be strangers and aliens on earth, 
    14: for those who speak thus show that they are seeking a homeland. 
    15: If they had been thinking of the land from which they had come, they would have had opportunity to return. 
    16: But now they desire a better homeland, a heavenly one. Therefore, God is not ashamed to be called their God, for he has prepared a city for them.

    17: By faith Abraham, when put to the test, offered up Isaac, and he who had received the promises was ready to offer his only son, 
    18: of whom it was said, “Through Isaac descendants shall bear your name.” 
    19: He reasoned that God was able to raise even from the dead, and he received Isaac back as a symbol. 
    20: By faith regarding things still to come Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau. 
    21: By faith Jacob, when dying, blessed each of the sons of Joseph and “bowed in worship, leaning on the top of his staff.” 
    22: By faith Joseph, near the end of his life, spoke of the Exodus of the Israelites and gave instructions about his bones.

    23: By faith Moses was hidden by his parents for three months after his birth, because they saw that he was a beautiful child, and they were not afraid of the king’s edict. 
    24: By faith Moses, when he had grown up, refused to be known as the son of Pharaoh’s daughter; 
    25: he chose to be ill-treated along with the people of God rather than enjoy the fleeting pleasure of sin. 
    26: He considered the reproach of the Anointed greater wealth than the treasures of Egypt, for he was looking to the recompense. 
    27: By faith he left Egypt, not fearing the king’s fury, for he persevered as if seeing the one who is invisible. 
    28: By faith he kept the Passover and sprinkled the blood, that the Destroyer of the firstborn might not touch them. 
    29: By faith they crossed the Red Sea as if it were dry land, but when the Egyptians attempted it they were drowned. 
    30: By faith the walls of Jericho fell after being encircled for seven days. 
    31: By faith Rahab the harlot did not perish with the disobedient, for she had received the spies in peace.

    32: What more shall I say? I have not time to tell of Gideon, Barak, Samson, Jephthah, of David and Samuel and the prophets, 
    33: who by faith conquered kingdoms, did what was righteous, obtained the promises; they closed the mouths of lions, 
    34: put out raging fires, escaped the devouring sword; out of weakness they were made powerful, became strong in battle, and turned back foreign invaders. 
    35: Women received back their dead through resurrection. Some were tortured and would not accept deliverance, in order to obtain a better resurrection. 
    36: Others endured mockery, scourging, even chains and imprisonment. 
    37: They were stoned, sawed in two, put to death at sword’s point; they went about in skins of sheep or goats, needy, afflicted, tormented. 
    38: The world was not worthy of them. They wandered about in deserts and on mountains, in caves and in crevices in the earth.

    39: Yet all these, though approved because of their faith, did not receive what had been promised. 
    40: God had foreseen something better for us, so that without us they should not be made perfect.


  Chapter 12.

    1: 
    2: God Our Father. 1 Therefore, since we are surrounded by so great a cloud of witnesses, let us rid ourselves of every burden and sin that clings to us[b] and persevere in running the race that lies before us 2 while keeping our eyes fixed on Jesus, the leader and perfecter of faith. For the sake of the joy that lay before him he endured the cross, despising its shame, and has taken his seat at the right of the throne of God. 
    3: Consider how he endured such opposition from sinners, in order that you may not grow weary and lose heart. 
    4: In your struggle against sin you have not yet resisted to the point of shedding blood. 
    5: You have also forgotten the exhortation addressed to you as sons:
“My son, do not disdain the discipline of the Lord
    or lose heart when reproved by him;

    6: 
for whom the Lord loves, he disciplines;
    he scourges every son he acknowledges.”

    7: Endure your trials as “discipline”; God treats you as sons. For what “son” is there whom his father does not discipline? 
    8: If you are without discipline, in which all have shared, you are not sons but bastards. 
    9: esides this, we have had our earthly fathers to discipline us, and we respected them. Should we not  submit all the more to the Father of spirits and live? 
    10: They disciplined us for a short time as seemed right to them, but he does so for our benefit, in order that we may share his holiness. 
    11: 
    12: God Our Father. 1 Therefore, since we are surrounded by so great a cloud of witnesses, let us rid ourselves of every burden and sin that clings to us[b] and persevere in running the race that lies before us 2 while keeping our eyes fixed on Jesus, the leader and perfecter of faith. For the sake of the joy that lay before him he endured the cross, despising its shame, and has taken his seat at the right of the throne of God. 3 Consider how he endured such opposition from sinners, in order that you may not grow weary and lose heart. 4 In your struggle against sin you have not yet resisted to the point of shedding blood. 5 You have also forgotten the exhortation addressed to you as sons:
“My son, do not disdain the discipline of the Lord
    or lose heart when reproved by him;
6 
for whom the Lord loves, he disciplines;
    he scourges every son he acknowledges.”
7 Endure your trials as “discipline”; God treats you as sons. For what “son” is there whom his father does not discipline? 8 If you are without discipline, in which all have shared, you are not sons but bastards. 9 Besides this, we have had our earthly fathers to discipline us, and we respected them. Should we not [then] submit all the more to the Father of spirits and live? 10 They disciplined us for a short time as seemed right to them, but he does so for our benefit, in order that we may share his holiness. 11 At the time, all discipline seems a cause not for joy but for pain, yet later it brings the peaceful fruit of righteousness to those who are trained by it.
12 So strengthen your drooping hands and your weak knees. 
    13: Make straight paths for your feet, that what is lame may not be dislocated but healed.
Penalties of Disobedience. 
    14: Strive for peace with everyone, and for that holiness without which no one will see the Lord. 
    15: See to it that no one be deprived of the grace of God, that no bitter root spring up and cause trouble, through which many may become defiled, 
    16: that no one be an immoral or profane person like Esau, who sold his birthright for a single meal. 
    17: For you know that later, when he wanted to inherit his father’s blessing, he was rejected because he found no opportunity to change his mind, even though he sought the blessing with tears.

    18: You have not approached that which could be touched[e] and a blazing fire and gloomy darkness and storm 
    19: and a trumpet blast and a voice speaking words such that those who heard begged that no message be further addressed to them, 
    20: for they could not bear to hear the command: “If even an animal touches the mountain, it shall be stoned.” 
    21: Indeed, so fearful was the spectacle that Moses said, “I am terrified and trembling.” 
    22: No, you have approached Mount Zion and the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and countless angels in festal gathering, 
    23: and the assembly of the firstborn enrolled in heaven, and God the judge of all, and the spirits of the just made perfect, 
    24: and Jesus, the mediator of a new covenant, and the sprinkled blood that speaks more eloquently than that of Abel.

    25: See that you do not reject the one who speaks. For if they did not escape when they refused the one who warned them on earth, how much more in our case if we turn away from the one who warns from heaven. 
    26: His voice shook the earth at that time, but now he has promised, “I will once more shake not only earth but heaven.” 
    27: That phrase, “once more,” points to  removal of shaken, created things, so that what is unshaken may remain. 
    28: Therefore, we who are receiving the unshakable kingdom should have gratitude, with which we should offer worship pleasing to God in reverence and awe. 
    29: For our God is a consuming fire.


End of day 341.