Day 20:

Reading Exodus, chapters ['25', '26', '27', '28']:

  Chapter 25.

    1: 
    2: 
Collection of Materials. 1 The Lord spoke to Moses: 2 Speak to the Israelites: Let them receive contributions for me. From each you shall receive the contribution that their hearts prompt them to give me. 
    3: These are the contributions you shall accept from them: gold, silver, and bronze; 
    4: 
    5: Collection of Materials. 1 The Lord spoke to Moses: 2 Speak to the Israelites: Let them receive contributions for me. From each you shall receive the contribution that their hearts prompt them to give me. 3 These are the contributions you shall accept from them: gold, silver, and bronze; 4 violet, purple, and scarlet yarn; fine linen and goat hair; 5 rams’ skins dyed red, and tahash skins; acacia wood; 
    6: oil for the light; spices for the anointing oil and for the fragrant incense; 
    7: onyx stones and other gems for mounting on the ephod and the breastpiece. 
    8: They are to make a sanctuary for me, that I may dwell in their midst. 
    9: ccording to all that I show you regarding the pattern of the tabernacle and the pattern of its furnishings, so you are to make it.
Plan of the Ark. 
    10: You shall make an ark of acacia wood, two and a half cubits long, one and a half cubits wide, and one and a half cubits high. 
    11: Plate it inside and outside with pure gold, and put a molding of gold around the top of it. 
    12: Cast four gold rings and put them on the four supports of the ark, two rings on one side and two on the opposite side. 
    13: Then make poles of acacia wood and plate them with gold. 
    14: These poles you are to put through the rings on the sides of the ark, for carrying it; 
    15: they must remain in the rings of the ark and never be withdrawn. 
    16: In the ark you are to put the covenant which I will give you.

    17: You shall then make a cover of pure gold, two and a half cubits long, and one and a half cubits wide. 
    18: Make two cherubim of beaten gold for the two ends of the cover; 
    19: make one cherub at one end, and the other at the other end, of one piece with the cover, at each end. 
    20: The cherubim shall have their wings spread out above, sheltering the cover with them; they shall face each other, with their faces looking toward the cover. 
    21: This cover you shall then place on top of the ark. In the ark itself you are to put the covenant which I will give you. 
    22: There I will meet you and there, from above the cover, between the two cherubim on the ark of the covenant, I will tell you all that I command you regarding the Israelites.
The Table. 
    23: You shall also make a table of acacia wood, two cubits long, a cubit wide, and a cubit and a half high. 
    24: 
    25: Collection of Materials. 1 The Lord spoke to Moses: 2 Speak to the Israelites: Let them receive contributions for me. From each you shall receive the contribution that their hearts prompt them to give me. 3 These are the contributions you shall accept from them: gold, silver, and bronze; 4 violet, purple, and scarlet yarn; fine linen and goat hair; 5 rams’ skins dyed red, and tahash skins; acacia wood; 6 oil for the light; spices for the anointing oil and for the fragrant incense; 7 onyx stones and other gems for mounting on the ephod and the breastpiece. 8 They are to make a sanctuary for me, that I may dwell in their midst. 9 According to all that I show you regarding the pattern of the tabernacle and the pattern of its furnishings, so you are to make it.
Plan of the Ark. 10 You shall make an ark of acacia wood, two and a half cubits[b] long, one and a half cubits wide, and one and a half cubits high. 11 Plate it inside and outside with pure gold, and put a molding of gold around the top of it. 12 Cast four gold rings and put them on the four supports of the ark, two rings on one side and two on the opposite side. 13 Then make poles of acacia wood and plate them with gold. 14 These poles you are to put through the rings on the sides of the ark, for carrying it; 15 they must remain in the rings of the ark and never be withdrawn. 16 In the ark you are to put the covenant which I will give you.
17 You shall then make a cover[c] of pure gold, two and a half cubits long, and one and a half cubits wide. 18 Make two cherubim[d] of beaten gold for the two ends of the cover; 19 make one cherub at one end, and the other at the other end, of one piece with the cover, at each end. 20 The cherubim shall have their wings spread out above, sheltering the cover with them; they shall face each other, with their faces looking toward the cover. 21 This cover you shall then place on top of the ark. In the ark itself you are to put the covenant which I will give you. 22 There I will meet you and there, from above the cover, between the two cherubim on the ark of the covenant, I will tell you all that I command you regarding the Israelites.
The Table. 23 You shall also make a table of acacia wood, two cubits long, a cubit wide, and a cubit and a half high. 24 Plate it with pure gold and make a molding of gold around it. 25 Make a frame[e] for it, a handbreadth high, and make a molding of gold around the frame. 
    26: You shall also make four rings of gold for it and fasten them at the four corners, one at each leg. 
    27: The rings shall be alongside the frame as holders for the poles to carry the table. 
    28: These poles for carrying the table you shall make of acacia wood and plate with gold. 
    29: You shall make its plates and cups, as well as its pitchers and bowls for pouring libations; make them of pure gold. 
    30: On the table you shall always keep showbread set before me.
The Menorah. 
    31: You shall make a menorah of pure beaten gold—its shaft and branches—with its cups and knobs and petals springing directly from it. 
    32: Six branches are to extend from its sides, three branches on one side, and three on the other. 
    33: On one branch there are to be three cups, shaped like almond blossoms, each with its knob and petals; on the opposite branch there are to be three cups, shaped like almond blossoms, each with its knob and petals; and so for the six branches that extend from the menorah. 
    34: On the menorah there are to be four cups, shaped like almond blossoms, with their knobs and petals. 
    35: The six branches that go out from the menorah are to have a knob under each pair. 
    36: Their knobs and branches shall so spring from it that the whole will form a single piece of pure beaten gold. 
    37: You shall then make seven lamps for it and so set up the lamps that they give their light on the space in front of the menorah. 
    38: These, as well as the trimming shears and trays, must be of pure gold. 
    39: Use a talent of pure gold for the menorah and all these utensils. 
    40: See that you make them according to the pattern shown you on the mountain.


  Chapter 26.

    1: 
    2: 
The Tent Cloth. 1 The tabernacle itself you shall make out of ten sheets woven of fine linen twined and of violet, purple, and scarlet yarn, with cherubim embroidered on them. 2 The length of each shall be twenty-eight cubits, and the width four cubits; all the sheets shall be of the same size. 
    3: Five of the sheets are to be joined one to another; and the same for the other five. 
    4: Make loops of violet yarn along the edge of the end sheet in one set, and the same along the edge of the end sheet in the other set. 
    5: 
    6: The Tent Cloth. 1 The tabernacle itself you shall make out of ten sheets woven of fine linen twined and of violet, purple, and scarlet yarn, with cherubim embroidered on them. 2 The length of each shall be twenty-eight cubits, and the width four cubits; all the sheets shall be of the same size. 3 Five of the sheets are to be joined one to another; and the same for the other five. 4 Make loops of violet yarn along the edge of the end sheet in one set, and the same along the edge of the end sheet in the other set. 5 Make fifty loops along the edge of the end sheet in the first set, and fifty loops along the edge of the corresponding sheet in the second set, and so placed that the loops are directly opposite each other. 6 Then make fifty clasps of gold and join the two sets of sheets, so that the tabernacle forms one whole.

    7: Also make sheets woven of goat hair for a tent over the tabernacle. Make eleven such sheets; 
    8: the length of each shall be thirty cubits, and the width four cubits: all eleven sheets shall be of the same size. 
    9: oin five of the sheets into one set, and the other six sheets into another set. Use the sixth sheet double at the front of the tent. 
    10: Make fifty loops along the edge of the end sheet in one set, and fifty loops along the edge of the end sheet in the second set. 
    11: Also make fifty bronze clasps and put them into the loops, to join the tent into one whole. 
    12: There will be an extra half sheet of tent covering, which shall be allowed to hang down over the rear of the tabernacle. 
    13: Likewise, the sheets of the tent will have an extra cubit’s length to be left hanging down on either side of the tabernacle to cover it. 
    14: Over the tent itself make a covering of rams’ skins dyed red, and above that, a covering of tahash skins.
The Framework. 
    15: You shall make frames for the tabernacle, acacia-wood uprights. 
    16: The length of each frame is to be ten cubits, and its width one and a half cubits. 
    17: Each frame shall have two arms joined one to another; so you are to make all the frames of the tabernacle. 
    18: Make the frames of the tabernacle as follows: twenty frames on the south side, 
    19: with forty silver pedestals under the twenty frames, two pedestals under each frame for its two arms; 
    20: twenty frames on the other side of the tabernacle, the north side, 
    21: with their forty silver pedestals, two pedestals under each frame. 
    22: At the rear of the tabernacle, to the west, six frames, 
    23: and two frames for the corners of the tabernacle, at its rear. 
    24: These two shall be double at the bottom, and likewise double at the top, to the first ring. That is how both corner frames are to be made. 
    25: 
    26: The Tent Cloth. 1 The tabernacle itself you shall make out of ten sheets woven of fine linen twined and of violet, purple, and scarlet yarn, with cherubim embroidered on them. 2 The length of each shall be twenty-eight cubits, and the width four cubits; all the sheets shall be of the same size. 3 Five of the sheets are to be joined one to another; and the same for the other five. 4 Make loops of violet yarn along the edge of the end sheet in one set, and the same along the edge of the end sheet in the other set. 5 Make fifty loops along the edge of the end sheet in the first set, and fifty loops along the edge of the corresponding sheet in the second set, and so placed that the loops are directly opposite each other. 6 Then make fifty clasps of gold and join the two sets of sheets, so that the tabernacle forms one whole.
7 Also make sheets woven of goat hair for a tent[b] over the tabernacle. Make eleven such sheets; 8 the length of each shall be thirty cubits, and the width four cubits: all eleven sheets shall be of the same size. 9 Join five of the sheets into one set, and the other six sheets into another set. Use the sixth sheet double at the front of the tent.[c] 10 Make fifty loops along the edge of the end sheet in one set, and fifty loops along the edge of the end sheet in the second set. 11 Also make fifty bronze clasps and put them into the loops, to join the tent into one whole. 12 There will be an extra half sheet of tent covering, which shall be allowed to hang down over the rear of the tabernacle. 13 Likewise, the sheets of the tent will have an extra cubit’s length to be left hanging down on either side of the tabernacle to cover it. 14 Over the tent itself make a covering of rams’ skins dyed red, and above that, a covering of tahash skins.
The Framework. 15 You shall make frames for the tabernacle, acacia-wood uprights. 16 The length of each frame is to be ten cubits, and its width one and a half cubits. 17 Each frame shall have two arms[d] joined one to another; so you are to make all the frames of the tabernacle. 18 Make the frames of the tabernacle as follows: twenty frames on the south side, 19 with forty silver pedestals under the twenty frames, two pedestals under each frame for its two arms; 20 twenty frames on the other side of the tabernacle, the north side, 21 with their forty silver pedestals, two pedestals under each frame. 22 At the rear of the tabernacle, to the west, six frames, 23 and two frames for the corners of the tabernacle, at its rear. 24 These two shall be double at the bottom, and likewise double at the top, to the first ring. That is how both corner frames are to be made. 25 Thus, there shall be eight frames, with their sixteen silver pedestals, two pedestals under each frame. 26 Also make bars of acacia wood: five for the frames on one side of the tabernacle, 
    27: five for those on the other side, and five for those at the rear, to the west. 
    28: The center bar, at the middle of the frames, shall reach across from end to end. 
    29: Plate the frames with gold, and make gold rings on them as holders for the bars, which are also to be plated with gold. 
    30: You shall set up the tabernacle according to its plan, which you were shown on the mountain.
The Veils. 
    31: You shall make a veil woven of violet, purple, and scarlet yarn, and of fine linen twined, with cherubim embroidered on it. 
    32: It is to be hung on four gold-plated columns of acacia wood, which shall have gold hooks and shall rest on four silver pedestals. 
    33: Hang the veil from clasps. The ark of the covenant you shall bring inside, behind this veil which divides the holy place from the holy of holies. 
    34: Set the cover on the ark of the covenant in the holy of holies.

    35: Outside the veil you shall place the table and the menorah, the latter on the south side of the tabernacle, opposite the table, which is to be put on the north side. 
    36: For the entrance of the tent make a variegated curtain of violet, purple, and scarlet yarn and of fine linen twined. 
    37: Make five columns of acacia wood for this curtain; plate them with gold, with their hooks of gold; and cast five bronze pedestals for them.


  Chapter 27.

    1: 
    2: 
The Altar for Burnt Offerings. 1 You shall make an altar of acacia wood, on a square, five cubits long and five cubits wide; it shall be three cubits high. 2 At the four corners make horns that are of one piece with the altar. You shall then plate it with bronze. 
    3: Make pots for removing the ashes, as well as shovels, basins, forks, and fire pans; all these utensils you shall make of bronze. 
    4: Make for it a grating, a bronze network; make four bronze rings for it, one at each of its four corners. 
    5: Put it down around the altar, on the ground. This network is to be half as high as the altar. 
    6: 
    7: The Altar for Burnt Offerings. 1 You shall make an altar of acacia wood, on a square, five cubits long and five cubits wide; it shall be three cubits high. 2 At the four corners make horns that are of one piece with the altar. You shall then plate it with bronze. 3 Make pots for removing the ashes, as well as shovels, basins, forks, and fire pans; all these utensils you shall make of bronze. 4 Make for it a grating,[b] a bronze network; make four bronze rings for it, one at each of its four corners. 5 Put it down around the altar, on the ground. This network is to be half as high as the altar. 6 You shall also make poles of acacia wood for the altar, and plate them with bronze. 7 These poles are to be put through the rings, so that they are on either side of the altar when it is carried. 
    8: Make the altar itself in the form of a hollow box. Just as it was shown you on the mountain, so it is to be made.
Court of the Tabernacle. 
    9: ou shall also make a court for the tabernacle. On the south side the court shall have hangings, of fine linen twined, a hundred cubits long, 
    10: with twenty columns and twenty pedestals of bronze; the hooks and bands on the columns shall be of silver. 
    11: On the north side there shall be similar hangings, a hundred cubits long, with twenty columns and twenty pedestals of bronze; the hooks and bands on the columns shall be of silver. 
    12: On the west side, across the width of the court, there shall be hangings, fifty cubits long, with ten columns and ten pedestals. 
    13: The width of the court on the east side shall be fifty cubits. 
    14: On one side there shall be hangings to the extent of fifteen cubits, with three columns and three pedestals; 
    15: on the other side there shall be hangings to the extent of fifteen cubits, with three columns and three pedestals.

    16: At the gate of the court there shall be a variegated curtain, twenty cubits long, woven of violet, purple, and scarlet yarn and of fine linen twined. It shall have four columns and four pedestals.

    17: All the columns around the court shall have bands and hooks of silver, and pedestals of bronze. 
    18: The court is to be one hundred cubits long, fifty cubits wide, and five cubits high. Fine linen twined must be used, and the pedestals must be of bronze. 
    19: All the fittings of the tabernacle, whatever be their use, as well as all its tent pegs and all the tent pegs of the court, must be of bronze.
Oil for the Lamps. 
    20: You shall command the Israelites to bring you clear oil of crushed olives, to be used for the light, so that you may keep lamps burning always. 
    21: From evening to morning Aaron and his sons shall maintain them before the Lord in the tent of meeting, outside the veil which hangs in front of the covenant. This shall be a perpetual statute for the Israelites throughout their generations.


  Chapter 28.

    1: 
    2: 
The Priestly Vestments. 1 Have your brother Aaron, and with him his sons, brought to you, from among the Israelites, that they may be my priests: Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar, Aaron’s sons. 2 For the glorious adornment of your brother Aaron you shall have sacred vestments made. 
    3: Therefore, tell the various artisans whom I have endowed with skill to make vestments for Aaron to consecrate him as my priest. 
    4: These are the vestments they shall make: a breastpiece, an ephod, a robe, a brocade tunic, a turban, and a sash. In making these sacred vestments which your brother Aaron and his sons are to wear in serving as my priests, 
    5: they shall use gold, violet, purple, and scarlet yarn and fine linen.
The Ephod and Breastpiece. 
    6: The ephod they shall make of gold thread and of violet, purple, and scarlet yarn, embroidered on cloth of fine linen twined. 
    7: 
    8: The Priestly Vestments. 1 Have your brother Aaron, and with him his sons, brought to you, from among the Israelites, that they may be my priests: Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar, Aaron’s sons. 2 For the glorious adornment of your brother Aaron you shall have sacred vestments made. 3 Therefore, tell the various artisans whom I have endowed with skill to make vestments for Aaron to consecrate him as my priest. 4 These are the vestments they shall make: a breastpiece, an ephod, a robe, a brocade tunic, a turban, and a sash. In making these sacred vestments which your brother Aaron and his sons are to wear in serving as my priests, 5 they shall use gold, violet, purple, and scarlet yarn and fine linen.
The Ephod and Breastpiece. 6 The ephod[b] they shall make of gold thread and of violet, purple, and scarlet yarn, embroidered on cloth of fine linen twined. 7 It shall have a pair of shoulder straps joined to its two upper ends. 8 The embroidered belt of the ephod shall extend out from it and, like it, be made of gold thread, of violet, purple, and scarlet yarn, and of fine linen twined.

    9: et two onyx stones and engrave on them the names of the sons of Israel: 
    10: six of their names on one stone, and the names of the remaining six on the other stone, in the order of their birth. 
    11: As a gem-cutter engraves a seal, so shall you have the two stones engraved with the names of the sons of Israel and then mounted in gold filigree work. 
    12: Set these two stones on the shoulder straps of the ephod as memorial stones of the sons of Israel. Thus Aaron shall bear their names on his shoulders as a reminder before the Lord. 
    13: Make filigree rosettes of gold, 
    14: as well as two chains of pure gold, twisted like cords, and fasten the cordlike chains to the filigree rosettes.

    15: The breastpiece of decision you shall also have made, embroidered like the ephod with gold thread and violet, purple, and scarlet yarn on cloth of fine linen twined. 
    16: It is to be square when folded double, a span high and a span wide. 
    17: On it you shall mount four rows of precious stones: in the first row, a carnelian, a topaz, and an emerald; 
    18: in the second row, a garnet, a sapphire, and a beryl; 
    19: in the third row, a jacinth, an agate, and an amethyst; 
    20: in the fourth row, a chrysolite, an onyx, and a jasper. These stones are to be mounted in gold filigree work, 
    21: twelve of them to match the names of the sons of Israel, each stone engraved like a seal with the name of one of the twelve tribes.

    22: When the chains of pure gold, twisted like cords, have been made for the breastpiece, 
    23: you shall then make two rings of gold for it and fasten them to the two upper ends of the breastpiece. 
    24: The gold cords are then to be fastened to the two rings at the upper ends of the breastpiece, 
    25: the other two ends of the cords being fastened in front to the two filigree rosettes which are attached to the shoulder straps of the ephod. 
    26: Make two other rings of gold and put them on the two lower ends of the breastpiece, on its edge that faces the ephod. 
    27: 
    28: The Priestly Vestments. 1 Have your brother Aaron, and with him his sons, brought to you, from among the Israelites, that they may be my priests: Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar, Aaron’s sons. 2 For the glorious adornment of your brother Aaron you shall have sacred vestments made. 3 Therefore, tell the various artisans whom I have endowed with skill to make vestments for Aaron to consecrate him as my priest. 4 These are the vestments they shall make: a breastpiece, an ephod, a robe, a brocade tunic, a turban, and a sash. In making these sacred vestments which your brother Aaron and his sons are to wear in serving as my priests, 5 they shall use gold, violet, purple, and scarlet yarn and fine linen.
The Ephod and Breastpiece. 6 The ephod[b] they shall make of gold thread and of violet, purple, and scarlet yarn, embroidered on cloth of fine linen twined. 7 It shall have a pair of shoulder straps joined to its two upper ends. 8 The embroidered belt of the ephod shall extend out from it and, like it, be made of gold thread, of violet, purple, and scarlet yarn, and of fine linen twined.
9 Get two onyx stones and engrave on them the names of the sons of Israel: 10 six of their names on one stone, and the names of the remaining six on the other stone, in the order of their birth. 11 As a gem-cutter engraves a seal, so shall you have the two stones engraved with the names of the sons of Israel and then mounted in gold filigree work. 12 Set these two stones on the shoulder straps of the ephod as memorial stones of the sons of Israel. Thus Aaron shall bear their names on his shoulders as a reminder before the Lord. 13 Make filigree rosettes of gold, 14 as well as two chains of pure gold, twisted like cords, and fasten the cordlike chains to the filigree rosettes.
15 The breastpiece[c] of decision you shall also have made, embroidered like the ephod with gold thread and violet, purple, and scarlet yarn on cloth of fine linen twined. 16 It is to be square when folded double, a span high and a span wide. 17 [d]On it you shall mount four rows of precious stones: in the first row, a carnelian, a topaz, and an emerald; 18 in the second row, a garnet, a sapphire, and a beryl; 19 in the third row, a jacinth, an agate, and an amethyst; 20 in the fourth row, a chrysolite, an onyx, and a jasper. These stones are to be mounted in gold filigree work, 21 twelve of them to match the names of the sons of Israel, each stone engraved like a seal with the name of one of the twelve tribes.
22 When the chains of pure gold, twisted like cords, have been made for the breastpiece, 23 you shall then make two rings of gold for it and fasten them to the two upper ends of the breastpiece. 24 The gold cords are then to be fastened to the two rings at the upper ends of the breastpiece, 25 the other two ends of the cords being fastened in front to the two filigree rosettes which are attached to the shoulder straps of the ephod. 26 Make two other rings of gold and put them on the two lower ends of the breastpiece, on its edge that faces the ephod. 27 Then make two more rings of gold and fasten them to the bottom of the shoulder straps next to where they join the ephod in front, just above its embroidered belt. 28 Violet ribbons shall bind the rings of the breastpiece to the rings of the ephod, so that the breastpiece will stay right above the embroidered belt of the ephod and not swing loose from it.

    29: Whenever Aaron enters the sanctuary, he will thus bear the names of the sons of Israel on the breastpiece of decision over his heart as a constant reminder before the Lord. 
    30: In this breastpiece of decision you shall put the Urim and Thummim, that they may be over Aaron’s heart whenever he enters the presence of the Lord. Thus he shall always bear the decisions for the Israelites over his heart in the presence of the Lord.
Other Vestments. 
    31: The robe of the ephod you shall make entirely of violet material. 
    32: It shall have an opening for the head in the center, and around this opening there shall be a selvage, woven as at the opening of a shirt, to keep it from being torn. 
    33: At the hem at the bottom you shall make pomegranates, woven of violet, purple, and scarlet yarn and fine linen twined, with gold bells between them; 
    34: a gold bell, a pomegranate, a gold bell, a pomegranate, all around the hem of the robe. 
    35: Aaron shall wear it when ministering, that its sound may be heard as he enters and leaves the Lord’s presence in the sanctuary; else he will die.

    36: You shall also make a plate of pure gold and engrave on it, as on a seal engraving, “Sacred to the Lord.” 
    37: This plate is to be tied over the turban with a violet ribbon in such a way that it rests on the front of the turban, 
    38: over Aaron’s forehead. Since Aaron bears whatever guilt the Israelites may incur in consecrating any of their sacred gifts, this plate must always be over his forehead, so that they may find favor with the Lord.

    39: The tunic of fine linen shall be brocaded. The turban shall be made of fine linen. The sash shall be of variegated work.

    40: Likewise, for the glorious adornment of Aaron’s sons you shall have tunics and sashes and skullcaps made, for glorious splendor. 
    41: With these you shall clothe your brother Aaron and his sons. Anoint and install them, consecrating them as my priests. 
    42: You must also make linen pants for them, to cover their naked flesh from their loins to their thighs. 
    43: Aaron and his sons shall wear them whenever they go into the tent of meeting or approach the altar to minister in the sanctuary, lest they incur guilt and die. This shall be a perpetual ordinance for him and for his descendants.


End of day 20.