Day 91:

Reading 1-Chronicles, chapters ['9', '10', '11', '12']:

  Chapter 9.

    1: Thus all Israel was listed in family lists, and these are recorded in the book of the kings of Israel.
Now Judah had been exiled to Babylon because of its treachery. 
    2: The first to settle again in their cities and dwell there were certain Israelites, the priests, the Levites, and the temple servants.
Jerusalemites. 
    3: In Jerusalem lived Judahites and Benjaminites; also Ephraimites and Manassites. 
    4: Among the Judahites was Uthai, son of Ammihud, son of Omri, son of Imri, son of Bani, one of the sons of Perez, son of Judah. 
    5: Among the Shelanites were Asaiah, the firstborn, and his sons. 
    6: Among the Zerahites were Jeuel and six hundred and ninety of their relatives. 
    7: Among the Benjaminites were Sallu, son of Meshullam, son of Hodaviah, son of Hassenuah, 
    8: 
    9:  Thus all Israel was listed in family lists, and these are recorded in the book of the kings of Israel.
Now Judah had been exiled to Babylon because of its treachery. 2 The first to settle again in their cities and dwell there were certain Israelites, the priests, the Levites, and the temple servants.
Jerusalemites. 3 In Jerusalem lived Judahites and Benjaminites; also Ephraimites and Manassites. 4 Among the Judahites was Uthai, son of Ammihud, son of Omri, son of Imri, son of Bani, one of the sons of Perez, son of Judah. 5 Among the Shelanites were Asaiah, the firstborn, and his sons. 6 Among the Zerahites were Jeuel and six hundred and ninety of their relatives. 7 Among the Benjaminites were Sallu, son of Meshullam, son of Hodaviah, son of Hassenuah, 8 as well as Ibneiah, son of Jeroham; Elah, son of Uzzi, son of Michri; Meshullam, son of Shephatiah, son of Reuel, son of Ibnijah. 9 Their kindred of various families were nine hundred and fifty-six. All those named were heads of their ancestral houses.

    10: Among the priests were Jedaiah; Jehoiarib; Jachin; 
    11: Azariah, son of Hilkiah, son of Meshullam, son of Zadok, son of Meraioth, son of Ahitub, the ruler of the house of God; 
    12: Adaiah, son of Jeroham, son of Pashhur, son of Malchijah; Maasai, son of Adiel, son of Jahzerah, son of Meshullam, son of Meshillemith, son of Immer. 
    13: Their brothers, heads of their ancestral houses, were one thousand seven hundred and sixty, valiant in the work of the service of the house of God.

    14: Among the Levites were Shemaiah, son of Hasshub, son of Azrikam, son of Hashabiah, one of the sons of Merari; 
    15: Bakbakkar; Heresh; Galal; Mattaniah, son of Mica, son of Zichri, a descendant of Asaph; 
    16: Obadiah, son of Shemaiah, son of Galal, a descendant of Jeduthun; and Berechiah, son of Asa, son of Elkanah, whose family lived in the villages of the Netophathites.

    17: The gatekeepers were Shallum, Akkub, Talmon, Ahiman, and their brothers; Shallum was the chief. 
    18: Previously they had stood guard at the king’s gate on the east side; now they became gatekeepers for the encampments of the Levites. 
    19: Shallum, son of Kore, son of Ebiasaph, a descendant of Korah, and his brothers of the same ancestral house of the Korahites had as their assigned task the guarding of the threshold of the tent, just as their fathers had guarded the entrance to the encampment of the Lord. 
    20: Phinehas, son of Eleazar, had been their chief in times past; the Lord was with him. 
    21: Zechariah, son of Meshelemiah, guarded the gate of the tent of meeting. 
    22: In all, those who were chosen for gatekeepers at the threshold were two hundred and twelve. They were inscribed in the family records of their villages. David and Samuel the seer had established them in their position of trust. 
    23: Thus they and their sons kept guard over the gates of the house of the Lord, the house which was then a tent. 
    24: The gatekeepers were stationed at the four sides, to the east, the west, the north, and the south. 
    25: Their brothers who lived in their own villages took turns in assisting them for seven-day periods, 
    26: while the four chief gatekeepers were on permanent duty. These were the Levites who also had charge of the chambers and treasures of the house of God. 
    27: They would spend the night near the house of God, for it was in their charge and they had the duty of opening it each morning.

    28: Some of them had charge of the vessels used there, tallying them as they were brought in and taken out. 
    29: Others were appointed to take care of the utensils and all the sacred vessels, as well as the fine flour, the wine, the oil, the frankincense, and the spices. 
    30: It was the sons of priests, however, who mixed the spiced ointments. 
    31: Mattithiah, one of the Levites, the firstborn of Shallum the Korahite, was entrusted with preparing the cakes. 
    32: Benaiah the Kohathite, one of their brothers, was in charge of setting out the showbread each sabbath.

    33: These were the singers and the gatekeepers, family heads over the Levites. They stayed in the chambers when free of duty, for day and night they had to be ready for service. 
    34: These were the levitical family heads by their generations, chiefs who dwelt in Jerusalem.
II. The History of David
Genealogy of Saul. 
    35: Jeiel, the founder of Gibeon, dwelt in Gibeon; his wife’s name was Maacah. 
    36: His firstborn son was Abdon; then came Zur, Kish, Baal, Ner, Nadab, 
    37: Gedor, Ahio, Zechariah, and Mikloth. 
    38: Mikloth became the father of Shimeam. These, too, with their relatives, dwelt opposite their relatives in Jerusalem. 
    39: Ner became the father of Kish, and Kish became the father of Saul. Saul became the father of Jonathan, Malchishua, Abinadab, and Eshbaal. 
    40: The son of Jonathan was Meribbaal, and Meribbaal became the father of Micah. 
    41: The sons of Micah were Pithon, Melech, Tahrea, and Ahaz. 
    42: Ahaz became the father of Jehoaddah, and Jehoaddah became the father of Alemeth, Azmaveth, and Zimri. Zimri became the father of Moza. 
    43: Moza became the father of Binea, whose son was Rephaiah, whose son was Eleasah, whose son was Azel. 
    44: Azel had six sons, whose names were Azrikam, his firstborn, Ishmael, Sheariah, Azariah, Obadiah, and Hanan; these were the sons of Azel.


  Chapter 10.

    1: 
Death of Saul and His Sons. 1 Now the Philistines went to war against Israel, and Israel fled before them, and they fell, slain on Mount Gilboa. 
    2: The Philistines pressed hard after Saul and his sons. When the Philistines had struck down Jonathan, Abinadab, and Malchishua, sons of Saul, 
    3: the fury of the battle converged on Saul. Then the archers hit him, and he was severely wounded.

    4: Saul said to his armor-bearer, “Draw your sword and run me through; otherwise these uncircumcised will come and abuse me.” But the armor-bearer, badly frightened, refused, so Saul took his own sword and fell upon it. 
    5: When the armor-bearer saw that Saul was dead, he too fell upon his sword and died. 
    6: Thus Saul, and his three sons, his whole house, died together. 
    7: When all the Israelites in the valley saw that Saul and his sons had fled and that they had died, they abandoned their cities and fled. Then the Philistines came and lived in those cities.

    8: On the following day, when the Philistines came to strip the slain, they found Saul and his sons fallen on Mount Gilboa. 
    9: 
    10: Death of Saul and His Sons. 1 Now the Philistines went to war against Israel, and Israel fled before them, and they fell, slain on Mount Gilboa. 2 The Philistines pressed hard after Saul and his sons. When the Philistines had struck down Jonathan, Abinadab, and Malchishua, sons of Saul, 3 the fury of the battle converged on Saul. Then the archers hit him, and he was severely wounded.
4 Saul said to his armor-bearer, “Draw your sword and run me through; otherwise these uncircumcised will come and abuse me.” But the armor-bearer, badly frightened, refused, so Saul took his own sword and fell upon it. 5 When the armor-bearer saw that Saul was dead, he too fell upon his sword and died. 6 Thus Saul, and his three sons, his whole house, died together. 7 When all the Israelites in the valley saw that Saul and his sons had fled and that they had died, they abandoned their cities and fled. Then the Philistines came and lived in those cities.
8 On the following day, when the Philistines came to strip the slain, they found Saul and his sons fallen on Mount Gilboa. 9 They stripped him, and took his head and his armor; these they sent throughout the land of the Philistines to bring the good news to their idols and to the people. 10 They put his armor in the temple of their gods, but his skull they impaled at the temple of Dagon.
Burial of Saul. 
    11: When all the inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead heard all that the Philistines had done to Saul, 
    12: all their warriors set out, recovered the corpses of Saul and his sons, and brought them to Jabesh. They buried their bones under the oak of Jabesh, and fasted for seven days.

    13: Thus Saul died because of his treason against the Lord in disobeying his word, and also because he had sought counsel from a ghost, 
    14: rather than from the Lord. Therefore the Lord took his life, and turned his kingdom over to David, the son of Jesse.


  Chapter 11.

    1: 
David Is Made King. 1 Then all Israel gathered around David in Hebron, and they said: “Look! We are your bone and your flesh. 
    2: In days past, when Saul was still the king, it was you who led Israel in all its battles. And now the Lord, your God, has said to you: You shall shepherd my people Israel; you shall be ruler over my people Israel.” 
    3: Then all the elders of Israel came to the king at Hebron, and at Hebron David made a covenant with them in the presence of the Lord; and they anointed David king over Israel, in accordance with the word of the Lord given through Samuel.
Jerusalem Captured. 
    4: Then David and all Israel went to Jerusalem, that is, Jebus, where the inhabitants of the land were called Jebusites. 
    5: The inhabitants of Jebus said to David, “You shall not enter here.” David nevertheless captured the fortress of Zion, which is the City of David. 
    6: David said, “Whoever strikes the Jebusites first shall be made chief and captain.” Joab, the son of Zeruiah, was the first to attack; and so he became chief. 
    7: David took up residence in the fortress, which therefore was called the City of David. 
    8: He built up the city on all sides, from the Millo all the way around, while Joab restored the rest of the city. 
    9: avid became ever more powerful, for the Lord of hosts was with him.
David’s Warriors. 
    10: 
    11: David Is Made King. 1 Then all Israel gathered around David in Hebron, and they said: “Look! We are your bone and your flesh. 2 In days past, when Saul was still the king, it was you who led Israel in all its battles. And now the Lord, your God, has said to you: You shall shepherd my people Israel; you shall be ruler over my people Israel.” 3 Then all the elders of Israel came to the king at Hebron, and at Hebron David made a covenant with them in the presence of the Lord; and they anointed David king over Israel, in accordance with the word of the Lord given through Samuel.
Jerusalem Captured. 4 Then David and all Israel went to Jerusalem, that is, Jebus, where the inhabitants of the land were called Jebusites. 5 The inhabitants of Jebus said to David, “You shall not enter here.” David nevertheless captured the fortress of Zion, which is the City of David. 6 David said, “Whoever strikes the Jebusites first shall be made chief and captain.” Joab, the son of Zeruiah, was the first to attack; and so he became chief. 7 David took up residence in the fortress, which therefore was called the City of David. 8 He built up the city on all sides, from the Millo all the way around, while Joab restored the rest of the city. 9 David became ever more powerful, for the Lord of hosts was with him.
David’s Warriors. 10 These were David’s chief warriors who, together with all Israel, supported him in his reign in order to make him king, according to the Lord’s word concerning Israel.
11 Here is the list of David’s warriors:
Ishbaal, the son of Hachamoni, chief of the Three. He brandished his spear over three hundred, whom he had slain in a single encounter.

    12: Next to him was Eleazar, the son of Dodo the Ahohite, one of the Three warriors. 
    13: He was with David at Pas-dammim, where the Philistines had massed for battle. There was a plot of land full of barley. The people were fleeing before the Philistines, 
    14: but he took his stand in the middle of the plot, kept it safe, and cut down the Philistines. Thus the Lord brought about a great victory.

    15: Three of the Thirty chiefs went down to the rock, to David, who was in the cave of Adullam while the Philistines were encamped in the valley of Rephaim. 
    16: David was then in the stronghold, and a Philistine garrison was at Bethlehem. 
    17: David had a strong craving, and said, “If only someone would give me a drink of water from the cistern by the gate of Bethlehem!” 
    18: Thereupon the Three broke through the encampment of the Philistines, drew water from the cistern by the gate of Bethlehem, and carried it back to David. But David refused to drink it. Instead, he poured it out to the Lord, 
    19: saying, “God forbid that I should do such a thing! Could I drink the blood of these men who risked their lives? For at the risk of their lives they brought it.” So he refused to drink it. Such deeds as these the Three warriors performed.

    20: Abishai, the brother of Joab, was the chief of the Thirty; he brandished his spear over three hundred, whom he had slain. He made a name beside the Three, 
    21: but was twice as famous as any of the Thirty, becoming their leader. However, he did not attain to the Three.

    22: Benaiah, son of Jehoiada, a valiant man of mighty deeds, from Kabzeel, killed the two sons of Ariel of Moab. Also, he went down and killed the lion in the cistern on a snowy day. 
    23: He likewise slew the Egyptian, a huge man five cubits tall. The Egyptian carried a spear that was like a weaver’s beam, but Benaiah came against him with a staff; he wrested the spear from the Egyptian’s hand, and killed him with that spear. 
    24: Such deeds as these Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, performed, and he made a name beside the Three warriors, 
    25: but was more famous than any of the Thirty. However, he did not attain to the Three. David put him in charge of his bodyguard.

    26: Also these warriors: Asahel, the brother of Joab; Elhanan, son of Dodo, from Bethlehem; 
    27: Shammoth, from En-harod; Helez, from Beth-pelet; 
    28: Ira, son of Ikkesh, from Tekoa; Abiezer, from Anathoth; 
    29: Sibbecai, from Husha; Ilai, from Ahoh; 
    30: Maharai, from Netophah; Heled, son of Baanah, from Netophah; 
    31: Ithai, son of Ribai, from Gibeah of Benjamin; Benaiah, from Pirathon; 
    32: Hurai, from Nahale-gaash; Abiel, from Beth-arabah; 
    33: Azmaveth, from Bahurim; Eliahba, from Shaalbon; 
    34: Jashen the Gunite; Jonathan, son of Shagee the Hararite; 
    35: Ahiam, son of Sachar the Hararite; Elipheleth, son of 
    36: Ahasbai, from Beth-maacah; Ahijah, from Gilo; 
    37: Hezro, from Carmel; Naarai, the son of Ezbai; 
    38: Joel, brother of Nathan, from Rehob, the Gadite; 
    39: Zelek the Ammonite; Naharai, from Beeroth, the armor-bearer of Joab, son of Zeruiah; 
    40: Ira, from Jattir; Gareb, from Jattir; 
    41: Uriah the Hittite; Zabad, son of Ahlai, 
    42: and, in addition to the Thirty, Adina, son of Shiza, the Reubenite, chief of the tribe of Reuben; 
    43: Hanan, son of Maacah; Joshaphat the Mithnite; 
    44: Uzzia, the Ashterathite; Shama and Jeiel, sons of Hotham, from Aroer; 
    45: Jediael, son of Shimri, and Joha, his brother, the Tizite; 
    46: Eliel the Mahavite; Jeribai and Joshaviah, sons of Elnaam; Ithmah, from Moab; 
    47: Eliel, Obed, and Jaasiel the Mezobian.


  Chapter 12.

    1: 
    2: David’s Early Followers. 1 The following men came to David in Ziklag while he was still under banishment from Saul, son of Kish; they, too, were among the warriors who helped him in his battles. 2 They were archers who could use either the right or the left hand, both in slinging stones and in shooting arrows with the bow. They were some of Saul’s kinsmen, from Benjamin. 
    3: Ahiezer was their chief, along with Joash, both sons of Shemaah of Gibeah; also Jeziel and Pelet, sons of Azmaveth; Beracah; Jehu, from Anathoth; 
    4: Ishmaiah the Gibeonite, a warrior among the Thirty, and over the Thirty; 
    5: Jeremiah; Jahaziel; Johanan; Jozabad from Gederah; 
    6: Eluzai; Jerimoth; Bealiah; Shemariah; Shephatiah the Haruphite; 
    7: Elkanah, Isshiah, Azarel, Joezer, and Jashobeam, who were Korahites; 
    8: Joelah and Zebadiah, sons of Jeroham, from Gedor.

    9: ome of the Gadites also went over to David when he was at the stronghold in the wilderness. They were valiant warriors, experienced soldiers equipped with shield and spear, fearsome as lions, swift as gazelles on the mountains. 
    10: Ezer was their chief, Obadiah was second, Eliab third, 
    11: 
    12: David’s Early Followers. 1 The following men came to David in Ziklag while he was still under banishment from Saul, son of Kish; they, too, were among the warriors who helped him in his battles. 2 They were archers who could use either the right or the left hand, both in slinging stones and in shooting arrows with the bow. They were some of Saul’s kinsmen, from Benjamin. 3 Ahiezer was their chief, along with Joash, both sons of Shemaah of Gibeah; also Jeziel and Pelet, sons of Azmaveth; Beracah; Jehu, from Anathoth; 4 Ishmaiah the Gibeonite, a warrior among the Thirty, and over the Thirty; 5 Jeremiah; Jahaziel; Johanan; Jozabad from Gederah; 6 Eluzai; Jerimoth; Bealiah; Shemariah; Shephatiah the Haruphite; 7 Elkanah, Isshiah, Azarel, Joezer, and Jashobeam, who were Korahites; 8 Joelah and Zebadiah, sons of Jeroham, from Gedor.
9 Some of the Gadites also went over to David when he was at the stronghold in the wilderness. They were valiant warriors, experienced soldiers equipped with shield and spear, fearsome as lions, swift as gazelles on the mountains. 10 Ezer was their chief, Obadiah was second, Eliab third, 11 Mishmannah fourth, Jeremiah fifth, 12 Attai sixth, Eliel seventh, 
    13: Johanan eighth, Elzabad ninth, 
    14: Jeremiah tenth, and Machbannai eleventh. 
    15: These Gadites were army commanders, the lesser over hundreds and the greater over thousands. 
    16: It was they who crossed over the Jordan in the first month, when it was overflowing both its banks, and chased away all who were in the valleys to the east and to the west.

    17: Some Benjaminites and Judahites also came to David at the stronghold. 
    18: David went out to meet them and addressed them in these words: “If you come peacefully, to help me, I am of a mind to have you join me. But if you have come to betray me to my enemies though my hands have done no wrong, may the God of our ancestors see and punish you.”

    19: Then a spirit clothed Amasai, the chief of the Thirty, and he answered David:
“We are yours, O David,
    we are with you, son of Jesse.
Peace, peace to you,
    and peace to him who helps you;
    may your God be your helper!”
So David received them and placed them among the leaders of his troops.

    20: Men from Manasseh also deserted to David when he came with the Philistines to battle against Saul. However, he did not help the Philistines, for their lords took counsel and sent him home, saying, “At the cost of our heads he will desert to his master Saul.” 
    21: As he was returning to Ziklag, therefore, these deserted to him from Manasseh: Adnah, Jozabad, Jediael, Michael, Jozabad, Elihu, and Zillethai, chiefs of thousands of Manasseh. 
    22: They helped David by taking charge of his troops, for they were all warriors and became commanders of his army. 
    23: And from day to day men kept coming to David’s help until there was a vast encampment, like God’s own encampment.
The Assembly at Hebron. 
    24: This is the muster of the detachments of armed troops that came to David at Hebron to bring Saul’s kingdom over to him, as the Lord had ordained. 
    25: Judahites bearing shields and spears: six thousand eight hundred armed troops. 
    26: Of the Simeonites, warriors fit for battle: seven thousand one hundred. 
    27: Of the Levites: four thousand six hundred, 
    28: along with Jehoiada, leader of the line of Aaron, with another three thousand seven hundred, 
    29: and Zadok, a young warrior, with twenty-two princes of his father’s house. 
    30: Of the Benjaminites, the kinsmen of Saul: three thousand—until this time, most of them had kept their allegiance to the house of Saul. 
    31: Of the Ephraimites: twenty thousand eight hundred warriors, men renowned in their ancestral houses. 
    32: Of the half-tribe of Manasseh: eighteen thousand, designated by name to come and make David king. 
    33: Of the Issacharites, their chiefs who were endowed with an understanding of the times and who knew what Israel had to do: two hundred chiefs, together with all their kinsmen under their command. 
    34: From Zebulun, men fit for military service, set in battle array with every kind of weapon for war: fifty thousand men rallying with a single purpose. 
    35: From Naphtali: one thousand captains, and with them, armed with shield and lance, thirty-seven thousand men. 
    36: Of the Danites, set in battle array: twenty-eight thousand six hundred. 
    37: From Asher, fit for military service and set in battle array: forty thousand. 
    38: From the other side of the Jordan, of the Reubenites, Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh, men equipped with every kind of weapon of war: one hundred and twenty thousand.

    39: All these soldiers, drawn up in battle order, came to Hebron with the resolute intention of making David king over all Israel. The rest of Israel was likewise of one mind to make David king. 
    40: They remained with David for three days, eating and drinking, for their relatives had prepared for them. 
    41: Moreover, their neighbors from as far as Issachar, Zebulun, and Naphtali came bringing food on donkeys, camels, mules, and oxen—provisions in great quantity of meal, pressed figs, raisins, wine, oil, oxen, and sheep. For there was rejoicing in Israel.


End of day 91.