Day 111:

Reading Nehemiah, chapters ['9', '10', '11', '12']:

  Chapter 9.

    1: On the twenty-fourth day of this month, the Israelites gathered together while fasting and wearing sackcloth, their heads covered with dust. 
    2: Those of Israelite descent separated themselves from all who were of foreign extraction, then stood forward and confessed their sins and the guilty deeds of their ancestors. 
    3: When they had taken their places, they read from the book of the law of the Lord their God, for a fourth of the day, and during another fourth they made their confession and bowed down before the Lord their God. 
    4: Standing on the platform of the Levites were Jeshua, Binnui, Kadmiel, Shebaniah, Bunni, Sherebiah, Bani, and Chenani, who cried out to the Lord their God, with a loud voice. 
    5: The Levites Jeshua, Kadmiel, Bani, Hashabneiah, Sherebiah, Hodiah, Shebaniah, and Pethahiah said,
“Arise, bless the Lord, your God,
    from eternity to eternity!”
“And may they bless your glorious name,
    which is exalted above all blessing and praise.”

    6: 
“You are the Lord, you alone;
You made the heavens,
    the highest heavens and all their host,
The earth and all that is upon it,
    the seas and all that is in them.
To all of them you give life,
    the heavenly hosts bow down before you.

    7: 
You are the Lord God
    who chose Abram,
Who brought him from Ur of the Chaldees,
    who named him Abraham.

    8: 
    9: ublic Confession of Sin. 1 On the twenty-fourth day of this month, the Israelites gathered together while fasting and wearing sackcloth, their heads covered with dust. 2 Those of Israelite descent separated themselves from all who were of foreign extraction, then stood forward and confessed their sins and the guilty deeds of their ancestors. 3 When they had taken their places, they read from the book of the law of the Lord their God, for a fourth of the day, and during another fourth they made their confession and bowed down before the Lord their God. 4 Standing on the platform of the Levites were Jeshua, Binnui, Kadmiel, Shebaniah, Bunni, Sherebiah, Bani, and Chenani, who cried out to the Lord their God, with a loud voice. 5 The Levites Jeshua, Kadmiel, Bani, Hashabneiah, Sherebiah, Hodiah, Shebaniah, and Pethahiah said,
“Arise, bless the Lord, your God,
    from eternity to eternity!”
“And may they bless your glorious name,
    which is exalted above all blessing and praise.”
6 
[b]“You are the Lord, you alone;
You made the heavens,
    the highest heavens and all their host,
The earth and all that is upon it,
    the seas and all that is in them.
To all of them you give life,
    the heavenly hosts bow down before you.
7 
You are the Lord God
    who chose Abram,
Who brought him from Ur of the Chaldees,
    who named him Abraham.
8 
You found his heart faithful in your sight,
    you made the covenant with him
To give the land of the Canaanites,
    Hittites, Amorites,
Perizzites, Jebusites, and Girgashites
    to him and his descendants.
You fulfilled your promises,
    for you are just.
9 
You saw the affliction of our ancestors in Egypt,
    you heard their cry by the Red Sea;

    10: 
You worked signs and wonders against Pharaoh,
    against all his servants and the people of his land,
Because you knew of their insolence toward them;
    thus you made for yourself a name even to this day.

    11: 
The sea you divided before them,
    on dry ground they passed through the midst of the sea;
Their pursuers you hurled into the depths,
    like a stone into the mighty waters.

    12: 
With a column of cloud you led them by day,
    and by night with a column of fire,
To light the way of their journey,
    the way in which they must travel.

    13: 
On Mount Sinai you came down,
    you spoke with them from heaven;
You gave them just ordinances, true laws,
    good statutes and commandments;

    14: 
Your holy sabbath you made known to them,
    commandments, statutes, and law you prescribed for them,
    by the hand of Moses your servant.

    15: 
Food from heaven you gave them in their hunger,
    water from a rock you sent them in their thirst.
You told them to enter and occupy the land
    which you had sworn to give them.

    16: 
But they, our ancestors, proved to be insolent;
    they were obdurate and did not obey your commandments.

    17: 
They refused to obey and no longer remembered
    the wonders you had worked for them.
They were obdurate and appointed a leader
    in order to return to their slavery in Egypt.
But you are a forgiving God, gracious and merciful,
    slow to anger and rich in mercy;
    you did not forsake them.

    18: 
Though they made for themselves a molten calf,
    and proclaimed, ‘Here is your God who brought you up from Egypt,’
    and were guilty of great insults,

    19: 
Yet in your great mercy
    you did not forsake them in the desert.
By day the column of cloud did not cease to lead them on their journey,
    by night the column of fire did not cease to light the way they were to travel.

    20: 
Your good spirit you bestowed on them,
    to give them understanding;
Your manna you did not withhold from their mouths,
    and you gave them water in their thirst.

    21: 
Forty years in the desert you sustained them:
    they did not want;
Their garments did not become worn,
    and their feet did not swell.

    22: 
You gave them kingdoms and peoples,
    which you divided among them as border lands.
They possessed the land of Sihon, king of Heshbon,
    and the land of Og, king of Bashan.

    23: 
You made their children as numerous as the stars of the heavens,
    and you brought them into the land
    which you had commanded their ancestors to enter and possess.

    24: 
The children went in to possess the land;
    you humbled before them the Canaanite inhabitants
    and gave them into their power,
Their kings and the peoples of the land,
    to do with them as they wished.

    25: 
They captured fortified cities and fertile land;
    they took possession of houses filled with all good things,
Cisterns already dug, vineyards, olive groves,
    and fruit trees in abundance.
They ate and had their fill,
    fattened and feasted on your great goodness.

    26: 
But they were contemptuous and rebelled against you:
    they cast your law behind their backs.
They murdered your prophets
    who bore witness against them to bring them back to you:
    they were guilty of great insults.

    27: 
Therefore you gave them into the power of their enemies,
    who oppressed them.
But in the time of their oppression they would cry out to you,
    and you would hear them from heaven,
And according to your great mercy give them saviors
    to deliver them from the power of their enemies.

    28: 
As soon as they had relief,
    they would go back to doing evil in your sight.
Again you abandoned them to the power of their enemies,
    who crushed them.
Once again they cried out to you, and you heard them from heaven
    and delivered them according to your mercy, many times over.

    29: 
You bore witness against them,
    to bring them back to your law.
But they were insolent
    and would not obey your commandments;
They sinned against your ordinances,
    which give life to those who keep them.
They turned stubborn backs, stiffened their necks,
    and would not obey.

    30: 
You were patient with them for many years,
    bearing witness against them through your spirit, by means of your prophets;
Still they would not listen.
    Therefore you delivered them into the power of the peoples of the lands.

    31: 
Yet in your great mercy you did not completely destroy them
    and did not forsake them, for you are a gracious and merciful God.

    32: 
Now, our God, great, mighty, and awesome God,
    who preserves the covenant of mercy,
    do not discount all the hardship that has befallen us,
Our kings, our princes, our priests,
    our prophets, our ancestors, and your entire people,
    from the time of the kings of Assyria until this day!

    33: 
In all that has come upon us you have been just,
    for you kept faith while we have done evil.

    34: 
Yes, our kings, our princes, our priests, and our ancestors
    have not kept your law;
They paid no attention to your commandments
    and the warnings which you gave them.

    35: 
While they were still in their kingdom,
    in the midst of the many good things that you had given them
And in the wide, fertile land
    that you had spread out before them,
They did not serve you
    nor turn away from their evil deeds.

    36: 
Today we are slaves!
    As for the land which you gave our ancestors
That they might eat its fruits and good things—
    see, we have become slaves upon it!

    37: 
Its rich produce goes to the kings
    you set over us because of our sins,
Who rule over our bodies and our cattle as they please.
    We are in great distress!”


  Chapter 10.

    1: 
Signatories to the Pact. 1 In view of all this, we are entering into a firm pact, which we are putting into writing. On the sealed document appear the names of our princes, our Levites, and our priests.

    2: On the sealed document: the governor Nehemiah, son of Hacaliah, and Zedekiah.

    3: Seraiah, Azariah, Jeremiah, 
    4: Pashhur, Amariah, Malchijah, 
    5: Hattush, Shebaniah, Malluch, 
    6: Harim, Meremoth, Obadiah, 
    7: Daniel, Ginnethon, Baruch, 
    8: Meshullam, Abijah, Mijamin, 
    9: 
    10: Signatories to the Pact. 1 In view of all this, we are entering into a firm pact, which we are putting into writing. On the sealed document appear the names of our princes, our Levites, and our priests.
2 On the sealed document: the governor Nehemiah, son of Hacaliah, and Zedekiah.
3 Seraiah, Azariah, Jeremiah, 4 Pashhur, Amariah, Malchijah, 5 Hattush, Shebaniah, Malluch, 6 Harim, Meremoth, Obadiah, 7 Daniel, Ginnethon, Baruch, 8 Meshullam, Abijah, Mijamin, 9 Maaziah, Bilgai, Shemaiah: these are the priests.
10 The Levites: Jeshua, son of Azaniah; Binnui, of the descendants of Henadad; Kadmiel; 
    11: and their kinsmen Shebaniah, Hodiah, Kelita, Pelaiah, Hanan, 
    12: Mica, Rehob, Hashabiah, 
    13: Zaccur, Sherebiah, Shebaniah, 
    14: Hodiah, Bani, Beninu.

    15: The leaders of the people: Parosh, Pahath-moab, Elam, Zattu, Bani, 
    16: Bunni, Azgad, Bebai, 
    17: Adonijah, Bigvai, Adin, 
    18: Ater, Hezekiah, Azzur, 
    19: Hodiah, Hashum, Bezai, 
    20: Hariph, Anathoth, Nebai, 
    21: Magpiash, Meshullam, Hezir, 
    22: Meshezabel, Zadok, Jaddua, 
    23: Pelatiah, Hanan, Anaiah, 
    24: Hoshea, Hananiah, Hasshub, 
    25: Hallhohesh, Pilha, Shobek, 
    26: Rehum, Hashabnah, Maaseiah, 
    27: Ahiah, Hanan, Anan, 
    28: Malluch, Harim, Baanah.
Provisions of the Pact. 
    29: The rest of the people, priests, Levites, gatekeepers, singers, temple servants, and all others who have separated themselves from the local inhabitants in favor of the law of God, with their wives, their sons, their daughters, all who are of the age of discretion, 
    30: join their influential kindred, and with the sanction of a curse take this oath to follow the law of God given through Moses, the servant of God, and to observe carefully all the commandments of the Lord, our Lord, his ordinances and his statutes.

    31: We will not marry our daughters to the local inhabitants, and we will not accept their daughters for our sons.

    32: When the local inhabitants bring in merchandise or any kind of grain for sale on the sabbath day, we will not buy from them on the sabbath or on any other holy day. In the seventh year we will forgo the produce, and forgive every kind of debt.

    33: We impose these commandments on ourselves: to give a third of a shekel each year for the service of the house of our God, 
    34: for the showbread, the daily grain offering, the daily burnt offering, for the sabbaths, new moons, and festivals, for the holy offerings and sin offerings to make atonement for Israel, for every service of the house of our God. 
    35: We, priests, Levites, and people, have determined by lot concerning the procurement of wood: it is to be brought to the house of our God by each of our ancestral houses at stated times each year, to be burnt on the altar of the Lord, our God, as the law prescribes. 
    36: We have agreed to bring each year to the house of the Lord the first fruits of our fields and of our fruit trees, of every kind; 
    37: also, as is prescribed in the law, to bring to the house of our God, to the priests who serve in the house of our God, the firstborn of our children and our animals, including the firstborn of our flocks and herds. 
    38: The first batch of our dough, and our offerings of the fruit of every tree, of wine and oil, we will bring to the priests, to the chambers of the house of our God. The tithe of our fields we will bring to the Levites; they, the Levites, shall take the tithe in all the cities of our service. 
    39: An Aaronite priest shall be with the Levites when they take the tithe, and the Levites shall bring the tithe of the tithes to the house of our God, to the chambers of the treasury. 
    40: For to these chambers the Israelites and Levites bring the offerings of grain, wine, and oil; there also are housed the vessels of the sanctuary, and the ministering priests, the gatekeepers, and the singers. We will not neglect the house of our God.


  Chapter 11.

    1: 
Resettlement of Jerusalem. 1 The administrators took up residence in Jerusalem, and the rest of the people cast lots to bring one man in ten to reside in Jerusalem, the holy city, while the other nine would remain in the other cities. 
    2: The people blessed all those who willingly agreed to take up residence in Jerusalem.

    3: These are the heads of the province who took up residence in Jerusalem. In the cities of Judah dwelt Israelites, priests, Levites, temple servants, and the descendants of Solomon’s servants, each on the property they owned in their own cities.

    4: In Jerusalem dwelt both Judahites and Benjaminites. Of the Judahites: Athaiah, son of Uzziah, son of Zechariah, son of Amariah, son of Shephatiah, son of Mehallalel, of the sons of Perez; 
    5: Maaseiah, son of Baruch, son of Colhozeh, son of Hazaiah, son of Adaiah, son of Joiarib, son of Zechariah, a son of the Shelanites. 
    6: The total of the descendants of Perez who dwelt in Jerusalem was four hundred and sixty-eight people of substance.

    7: These were the Benjaminites: Sallu, son of Meshullam, son of Joed, son of Pedaiah, son of Kolaiah, son of Maaseiah, son of Ithiel, son of Jeshaiah, 
    8: and his kinsmen, warriors, nine hundred and twenty-eight in number. 
    9: oel, son of Zichri, was their commander, and Judah, son of Hassenuah, was second in command of the city.

    10: 
    11: Resettlement of Jerusalem. 1 The administrators took up residence in Jerusalem, and the rest of the people cast lots to bring one man in ten to reside in Jerusalem, the holy city, while the other nine would remain in the other cities. 2 The people blessed all those who willingly agreed to take up residence in Jerusalem.
3 These are the heads of the province who took up residence in Jerusalem. In the cities of Judah dwelt Israelites, priests, Levites, temple servants, and the descendants of Solomon’s servants, each on the property they owned in their own cities.
4 In Jerusalem dwelt both Judahites and Benjaminites. Of the Judahites: Athaiah, son of Uzziah, son of Zechariah, son of Amariah, son of Shephatiah, son of Mehallalel, of the sons of Perez; 5 Maaseiah, son of Baruch, son of Colhozeh, son of Hazaiah, son of Adaiah, son of Joiarib, son of Zechariah, a son of the Shelanites. 6 The total of the descendants of Perez who dwelt in Jerusalem was four hundred and sixty-eight people of substance.
7 These were the Benjaminites: Sallu, son of Meshullam, son of Joed, son of Pedaiah, son of Kolaiah, son of Maaseiah, son of Ithiel, son of Jeshaiah, 8 and his kinsmen, warriors, nine hundred and twenty-eight in number. 9 Joel, son of Zichri, was their commander, and Judah, son of Hassenuah, was second in command of the city.
10 Among the priests were: Jedaiah; Joiarib; Jachin; 11 Seraiah, son of Hilkiah, son of Meshullam, son of Zadok, son of Meraioth, son of Ahitub, the ruler of the house of God, 
    12: and their kinsmen who carried out the temple service, eight hundred and twenty-two; Adaiah, son of Jeroham, son of Pelaliah, son of Amzi, son of Zechariah, son of Pashhur, son of Malchijah, 
    13: and his kinsmen, heads of ancestral houses, two hundred and forty-two; and Amasai, son of Azarel, son of Ahzai, son of Meshillemoth, son of Immer, 
    14: and his kinsmen, warriors, one hundred and twenty-eight. Their commander was Zabdiel, son of Haggadol.

    15: Among the Levites were Shemaiah, son of Hasshub, son of Azrikam, son of Hashabiah, son of Bunni; 
    16: Shabbethai and Jozabad, levitical chiefs who were placed over the external affairs of the house of God; 
    17: Mattaniah, son of Micah, son of Zabdi, son of Asaph, director of the psalms, who led the thanksgiving at prayer; Bakbukiah, second in rank among his kinsmen; and Abda, son of Shammua, son of Galal, son of Jeduthun. 
    18: The total of the Levites in the holy city was two hundred and eighty-four.

    19: The gatekeepers were Akkub, Talmon, and their kinsmen, who kept watch over the gates; one hundred and seventy-two in number.

    20: The rest of Israel, including priests and Levites, were in all the other cities of Judah in their own inheritances.

    21: The temple servants lived on Ophel. Ziha and Gishpa were in charge of the temple servants.

    22: The prefect of the Levites in Jerusalem was Uzzi, son of Bani, son of Hashabiah, son of Mattaniah, son of Micah; he was one of the descendants of Asaph, the singers appointed to the service of the house of God— 
    23: for they had been appointed by royal decree, and there was a fixed schedule for the singers assigning them their daily duties.

    24: Pethahiah, son of Meshezabel, a descendant of Zerah, son of Judah, was royal deputy in all affairs that concerned the people.
Other Settlements. 
    25: As concerns their villages with their fields: Judahites lived in Kiriath-arba and its dependencies, in Dibon and its dependencies, in Jekabzeel and its villages, 
    26: in Jeshua, Moladah, Beth-pelet, 
    27: in Hazarshual, in Beer-sheba and its dependencies, 
    28: in Ziklag, in Meconah and its dependencies, 
    29: in En-rimmon, Zorah, Jarmuth, 
    30: Zanoah, Adullam, and their villages, Lachish and its fields, Azekah and its dependencies. They were settled from Beer-sheba to Ge-hinnom.

    31: Benjaminites were in Geba, Michmash, Aija, Bethel and its dependencies, 
    32: Anathoth, Nob, Ananiah, 
    33: Hazor, Ramah, Gittaim, 
    34: Hadid, Zeboim, Neballat, 
    35: Lod, Ono, and the Valley of the Artisans.

    36: Some divisions of the Levites from Judah were attached to Benjamin.


  Chapter 12.

    1: 
    2: Priests and Levites at the Time of Zerubbabel. 1 The following are the priests and Levites who returned with Zerubbabel, son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua: Seraiah, Jeremiah, Ezra, 2 Amariah, Malluch, Hattush, 
    3: Shecaniah, Rehum, Meremoth, 
    4: Iddo, Ginnethon, Abijah, 
    5: Mijamin, Maadiah, Bilgah, 
    6: Shemaiah, and Joiarib, Jedaiah, 
    7: Sallu, Amok, Hilkiah, Jedaiah. These were the priestly heads and their kinsmen in the days of Jeshua.

    8: The Levites were Jeshua, Binnui, Kadmiel, Sherebiah, Judah, Mattaniah, who, together with his kinsmen, was in charge of the thanksgiving hymns, 
    9: hile Bakbukiah and Unno and their kinsmen ministered opposite them by turns.
High Priests. 
    10: Jeshua became the father of Joiakim, Joiakim the father of Eliashib, and Eliashib the father of Joiada; 
    11: 
    12: Priests and Levites at the Time of Zerubbabel. 1 The following are the priests and Levites who returned with Zerubbabel, son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua: Seraiah, Jeremiah, Ezra, 2 Amariah, Malluch, Hattush, 3 Shecaniah, Rehum, Meremoth, 4 Iddo, Ginnethon, Abijah, 5 Mijamin, Maadiah, Bilgah, 6 Shemaiah, and Joiarib, Jedaiah, 7 Sallu, Amok, Hilkiah, Jedaiah. These were the priestly heads and their kinsmen in the days of Jeshua.
8 The Levites were Jeshua, Binnui, Kadmiel, Sherebiah, Judah, Mattaniah, who, together with his kinsmen, was in charge of the thanksgiving hymns, 9 while Bakbukiah and Unno and their kinsmen ministered opposite them by turns.
High Priests. 10 Jeshua became the father of Joiakim, Joiakim the father of Eliashib, and Eliashib the father of Joiada; 11 Joiada the father of Johanan, and Johanan the father of Jaddua.
Priests and Levites Under Joiakim. 12 In the days of Joiakim these were the priestly family heads: for Seraiah, Meraiah; for Jeremiah, Hananiah; 
    13: for Ezra, Meshullam; for Amariah, Jehohanan; 
    14: for Malluchi, Jonathan; for Shebaniah, Joseph; 
    15: for Harim, Adna; for Meremoth, Helkai; 
    16: for Iddo, Zechariah; for Ginnethon, Meshullam; 
    17: for Abijah, Zichri; for Miamin,…; for Moadiah, Piltai; 
    18: for Bilgah, Shammua; for Shemaiah, Jehonathan; 
    19: and for Joiarib, Mattenai; for Jedaiah, Uzzi; 
    20: for Sallu, Kallai; for Amok, Eber; 
    21: for Hilkiah, Hashabiah; for Jedaiah, Nethanel.

    22: In the time of Eliashib, Joiada, Johanan, and Jaddua, the heads of ancestral houses of the priests were written down in the Book of Chronicles, up until the reign of Darius the Persian. 
    23: The sons of Levi: the family heads were written down in the Book of Chronicles, up until the time of Johanan, the son of Eliashib.

    24: The heads of the Levites were Hashabiah, Sherebiah, Jeshua, Binnui, Kadmiel. Their kinsmen who stood opposite them to sing praises and thanksgiving in fulfillment of the command of David, the man of God, one section opposite the other, 
    25: were Mattaniah, Bakbukiah, Obadiah.
Meshullam, Talmon, and Akkub were gatekeepers. They guarded the storerooms at the gates.

    26: All these lived in the time of Joiakim, son of Jeshua, son of Jozadak (and in the time of Nehemiah the governor and of Ezra the priest-scribe).
Dedication of the Wall. 
    27: At the dedication of the wall of Jerusalem, the Levites were sought out wherever they lived and were brought to Jerusalem to celebrate a joyful dedication with thanksgiving hymns and the music of cymbals, harps, and lyres. 
    28: The levitical singers gathered together from the region about Jerusalem, from the villages of the Netophathites, 
    29: from Beth-gilgal, and from the plains of Geba and Azmaveth (for the singers had built themselves settlements about Jerusalem). 
    30: The priests and Levites first purified themselves, then they purified the people, the gates, and the wall.

    31: I had the administrators of Judah go up on the wall, and I arranged two great choirs. The first of these proceeded to the right, along the top of the wall, in the direction of the Dung Gate, 
    32: followed by Hoshaiah and half the administrators of Judah, 
    33: along with Azariah, Ezra, Meshullam, 
    34: Judah, Benjamin, Shemaiah, and Jeremiah, 
    35: priests with the trumpets, and also Zechariah, son of Jonathan, son of Shemaiah, son of Mattaniah, son of Micaiah, son of Zaccur, son of Asaph, 
    36: and his kinsmen Shemaiah, Azarel, Milalai, Gilalai, Maai, Nethanel, Judah, and Hanani, with the musical instruments of David, the man of God. Ezra the scribe was at their head. 
    37: At the Fountain Gate they went straight up by the steps of the City of David and continued along the top of the wall above the house of David until they came to the Water Gate on the east.

    38: The second choir proceeded to the left, followed by myself and the other half of the administrators, along the top of the wall past the Oven Tower as far as the Broad Wall, 
    39: then past the Ephraim Gate to the Mishneh Gate, the Fish Gate, the Tower of Hananel, and the Hundred Tower, as far as the Sheep Gate. They came to a halt at the Prison Gate.

    40: Both choirs took up a position in the house of God; I, too, and half the magistrates with me, 
    41: together with the priests Eliakim, Maaseiah, Minjamin, Micaiah, Elioenai, Zechariah, Hananiah, with the trumpets, 
    42: and Maaseiah, Shemaiah, Eleazar, Uzzi, Jehohanan, Malchijah, Elam, and Ezer. The singers were heard under the leadership of Jezrahiah. 
    43: Great sacrifices were offered on that day, and they rejoiced, for God had given them cause for great rejoicing. The women and the children joined in, and the rejoicing at Jerusalem could be heard from far off.

    44: At that time men were appointed over the chambers set aside for stores, offerings, first fruits, and tithes; in them they were to collect from the fields of the various cities the portions legally assigned to the priests and Levites. For Judah rejoiced in its appointed priests and Levites 
    45: who carried out the ministry of their God and the ministry of purification (as did the singers and the gatekeepers) in accordance with the prescriptions of David and Solomon, his son. 
    46: For in the days of David and Asaph, long ago, there were leaders of singers for songs of praise and thanksgiving to God. 
    47: All Israel, in the days of Zerubbabel and in the days of Nehemiah, gave the singers and the gatekeepers their portions, according to their daily needs. They made their consecrated offering to the Levites, and the Levites made theirs to the descendants of Aaron.


End of day 111.