Day 4:

Reading Genesis, chapters ['13', '14', '15', '16']:

  Chapter 13.

    1: 
Abram and Lot Part. 1 From Egypt Abram went up to the Negeb with his wife and all that belonged to him, and Lot went with him. 
    2: 
    3: Abram and Lot Part. 1 From Egypt Abram went up to the Negeb with his wife and all that belonged to him, and Lot went with him. 2 Now Abram was very rich in livestock, silver, and gold. 3 From the Negeb he traveled by stages toward Bethel, to the place between Bethel and Ai where his tent had formerly stood, 
    4: the site where he had first built the altar; and there Abram invoked the Lord by name.

    5: Lot, who went with Abram, also had flocks and herds and tents, 
    6: so that the land could not support them if they stayed together; their possessions were so great that they could not live together. 
    7: There were quarrels between the herders of Abram’s livestock and the herders of Lot’s livestock. At this time the Canaanites and the Perizzites were living in the land.

    8: So Abram said to Lot: “Let there be no strife between you and me, or between your herders and my herders, for we are kindred. 
    9: s not the whole land available? Please separate from me. If you prefer the left, I will go to the right; if you prefer the right, I will go to the left.” 
    10: Lot looked about and saw how abundantly watered the whole Jordan Plain was as far as Zoar, like the Lord’s own garden, or like Egypt. This was before the Lord had destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah. 
    11: Lot, therefore, chose for himself the whole Jordan Plain and set out eastward. Thus they separated from each other. 
    12: 
    13: Abram and Lot Part. 1 From Egypt Abram went up to the Negeb with his wife and all that belonged to him, and Lot went with him. 2 Now Abram was very rich in livestock, silver, and gold. 3 From the Negeb he traveled by stages toward Bethel, to the place between Bethel and Ai where his tent had formerly stood, 4 the site where he had first built the altar; and there Abram invoked the Lord by name.
5 Lot, who went with Abram, also had flocks and herds and tents, 6 so that the land could not support them if they stayed together; their possessions were so great that they could not live together. 7 There were quarrels between the herders of Abram’s livestock and the herders of Lot’s livestock. At this time the Canaanites and the Perizzites were living in the land.
8 So Abram said to Lot: “Let there be no strife between you and me, or between your herders and my herders, for we are kindred. 9 Is not the whole land available? Please separate from me. If you prefer the left, I will go to the right; if you prefer the right, I will go to the left.” 10 Lot looked about and saw how abundantly watered the whole Jordan Plain was as far as Zoar, like the Lord’s own garden, or like Egypt. This was before the Lord had destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah. 11 Lot, therefore, chose for himself the whole Jordan Plain and set out eastward. Thus they separated from each other. 12 Abram settled in the land of Canaan, while Lot settled among the cities of the Plain, pitching his tents near Sodom. 13 Now the inhabitants of Sodom were wicked, great sinners against the Lord.

    14: After Lot had parted from him, the Lord said to Abram: Look about you, and from where you are, gaze to the north and south, east and west; 
    15: all the land that you see I will give to you and your descendants forever. 
    16: I will make your descendants like the dust of the earth; if anyone could count the dust of the earth, your descendants too might be counted. 
    17: Get up and walk through the land, across its length and breadth, for I give it to you. 
    18: Abram moved his tents and went on to settle near the oak of Mamre, which is at Hebron. There he built an altar to the Lord.


  Chapter 14.

    1: 
The Four Kings. 1 When Amraphel king of Shinar, Arioch king of Ellasar, Chedorlaomer king of Elam, and Tidal king of Goiim 
    2: made war on Bera king of Sodom, Birsha king of Gomorrah, Shinab king of Admah, Shemeber king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela (that is, Zoar), 
    3: 
    4: The Four Kings. 1 When Amraphel king of Shinar, Arioch king of Ellasar, Chedorlaomer king of Elam, and Tidal king of Goiim 2 made war on Bera king of Sodom, Birsha king of Gomorrah, Shinab king of Admah, Shemeber king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela (that is, Zoar), 3 all the latter kings joined forces in the Valley of Siddim (that is, the Salt Sea[b]). 4 For twelve years they had served Chedorlaomer, but in the thirteenth year they rebelled. 
    5: In the fourteenth year Chedorlaomer and the kings allied with him came and defeated the Rephaim in Ashteroth-karnaim, the Zuzim in Ham, the Emim in Shaveh-kiriathaim, 
    6: and the Horites in the hill country of Seir, as far as El-paran, close by the wilderness. 
    7: They then turned back and came to En-mishpat (that is, Kadesh), and they subdued the whole country of both the Amalekites and the Amorites who lived in Hazazon-tamar. 
    8: Thereupon the king of Sodom, the king of Gomorrah, the king of Admah, the king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela (that is, Zoar) marched out, and in the Valley of Siddim they went into battle against them: 
    9: gainst Chedorlaomer king of Elam, Tidal king of Goiim, Amraphel king of Shinar, and Arioch king of Ellasar—four kings against five. 
    10: Now the Valley of Siddim was full of bitumen pits; and as the king of Sodom and the king of Gomorrah fled, they fell into these, while the rest fled to the mountains. 
    11: The victors seized all the possessions and food supplies of Sodom and Gomorrah and then went their way. 
    12: They took with them Abram’s nephew Lot, who had been living in Sodom, as well as his possessions, and departed.

    13: 
    14: The Four Kings. 1 When Amraphel king of Shinar, Arioch king of Ellasar, Chedorlaomer king of Elam, and Tidal king of Goiim 2 made war on Bera king of Sodom, Birsha king of Gomorrah, Shinab king of Admah, Shemeber king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela (that is, Zoar), 3 all the latter kings joined forces in the Valley of Siddim (that is, the Salt Sea[b]). 4 For twelve years they had served Chedorlaomer, but in the thirteenth year they rebelled. 5 In the fourteenth year Chedorlaomer and the kings allied with him came and defeated the Rephaim in Ashteroth-karnaim, the Zuzim in Ham, the Emim in Shaveh-kiriathaim, 6 and the Horites in the hill country of Seir, as far as El-paran, close by the wilderness. 7 They then turned back and came to En-mishpat (that is, Kadesh), and they subdued the whole country of both the Amalekites and the Amorites who lived in Hazazon-tamar. 8 Thereupon the king of Sodom, the king of Gomorrah, the king of Admah, the king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela (that is, Zoar) marched out, and in the Valley of Siddim they went into battle against them: 9 against Chedorlaomer king of Elam, Tidal king of Goiim, Amraphel king of Shinar, and Arioch king of Ellasar—four kings against five. 10 Now the Valley of Siddim was full of bitumen pits; and as the king of Sodom and the king of Gomorrah fled, they fell into these, while the rest fled to the mountains. 11 The victors seized all the possessions and food supplies of Sodom and Gomorrah and then went their way. 12 They took with them Abram’s nephew Lot, who had been living in Sodom, as well as his possessions, and departed.
13 A survivor came and brought the news to Abram the Hebrew,[c] who was camping at the oak of Mamre the Amorite, a kinsman of Eshcol and Aner; these were allies of Abram. 14 When Abram heard that his kinsman had been captured, he mustered three hundred and eighteen of his retainers,[d] born in his house, and went in pursuit as far as Dan. 
    15: He and his servants deployed against them at night, defeated them, and pursued them as far as Hobah, which is north of Damascus. 
    16: He recovered all the possessions. He also recovered his kinsman Lot and his possessions, along with the women and the other people.

    17: When Abram returned from his defeat of Chedorlaomer and the kings who were allied with him, the king of Sodom went out to greet him in the Valley of Shaveh (that is, the King’s Valley).

    18: Melchizedek, king of Salem, brought out bread and wine. He was a priest of God Most High. 
    19: He blessed Abram with these words:
“Blessed be Abram by God Most High,
    the creator of heaven and earth;

    20: 
And blessed be God Most High,
    who delivered your foes into your hand.”
Then Abram gave him a tenth of everything.

    21: The king of Sodom said to Abram, “Give me the captives; the goods you may keep.” 
    22: But Abram replied to the king of Sodom: “I have sworn to the Lord, God Most High, the creator of heaven and earth, 
    23: that I would not take so much as a thread or a sandal strap from anything that is yours, so that you cannot say, ‘I made Abram rich.’ 
    24: Nothing for me except what my servants have consumed and the share that is due to the men who went with me—Aner, Eshcol and Mamre; let them take their share.”


  Chapter 15.

    1: 
The Covenant with Abram. 1 Some time afterward, the word of the Lord came to Abram in a vision: Do not fear, Abram! I am your shield; I will make your reward very great.

    2: But Abram said, “Lord God, what can you give me, if I die childless and have only a servant of my household, Eliezer of Damascus?” 
    3: Abram continued, “Look, you have given me no offspring, so a servant of my household will be my heir.” 
    4: 
    5: The Covenant with Abram. 1 Some time afterward, the word of the Lord came to Abram in a vision: Do not fear, Abram! I am your shield; I will make your reward very great.
2 But Abram said, “Lord God, what can you give me, if I die childless and have only a servant of my household, Eliezer of Damascus?” 3 Abram continued, “Look, you have given me no offspring, so a servant of my household will be my heir.” 4 Then the word of the Lord came to him: No, that one will not be your heir; your own offspring will be your heir. 5 He took him outside and said: Look up at the sky and count the stars, if you can. Just so, he added, will your descendants be. 
    6: Abram put his faith in the Lord, who attributed it to him as an act of righteousness.

    7: He then said to him: I am the Lord who brought you from Ur of the Chaldeans to give you this land as a possession. 
    8: “Lord God,” he asked, “how will I know that I will possess it?” 
    9: c]He answered him: Bring me a three-year-old heifer, a three-year-old female goat, a three-year-old ram, a turtledove, and a young pigeon. 
    10: He brought him all these, split them in two, and placed each half opposite the other; but the birds he did not cut up. 
    11: Birds of prey swooped down on the carcasses, but Abram scared them away. 
    12: As the sun was about to set, a deep sleep fell upon Abram, and a great, dark dread descended upon him.

    13: Then the Lord said to Abram: Know for certain that your descendants will reside as aliens in a land not their own, where they shall be enslaved and oppressed for four hundred years. 
    14: 
    15: The Covenant with Abram. 1 Some time afterward, the word of the Lord came to Abram in a vision: Do not fear, Abram! I am your shield; I will make your reward very great.
2 But Abram said, “Lord God, what can you give me, if I die childless and have only a servant of my household, Eliezer of Damascus?” 3 Abram continued, “Look, you have given me no offspring, so a servant of my household will be my heir.” 4 Then the word of the Lord came to him: No, that one will not be your heir; your own offspring will be your heir. 5 He took him outside and said: Look up at the sky and count the stars, if you can. Just so, he added, will your descendants be. 6 Abram put his faith in the Lord, who attributed it to him as an act of righteousness.[b]
7 He then said to him: I am the Lord who brought you from Ur of the Chaldeans to give you this land as a possession. 8 “Lord God,” he asked, “how will I know that I will possess it?” 9 [c]He answered him: Bring me a three-year-old heifer, a three-year-old female goat, a three-year-old ram, a turtledove, and a young pigeon. 10 He brought him all these, split them in two, and placed each half opposite the other; but the birds he did not cut up. 11 Birds of prey swooped down on the carcasses, but Abram scared them away. 12 As the sun was about to set, a deep sleep fell upon Abram, and a great, dark dread descended upon him.
13 [d]Then the Lord said to Abram: Know for certain that your descendants will reside as aliens in a land not their own, where they shall be enslaved and oppressed for four hundred years. 14 But I will bring judgment on the nation they must serve, and after this they will go out with great wealth. 15 You, however, will go to your ancestors in peace; you will be buried at a ripe old age. 
    16: In the fourth generation your descendants will return here, for the wickedness of the Amorites is not yet complete.

    17: When the sun had set and it was dark, there appeared a smoking fire pot and a flaming torch, which passed between those pieces. 
    18: On that day the Lord made a covenant with Abram, saying: To your descendants I give this land, from the Wadi of Egypt to the Great River, the Euphrates, 
    19: the land of the Kenites, the Kenizzites, the Kadmonites, 
    20: the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Rephaim, 
    21: the Amorites, the Canaanites, the Girgashites, and the Jebusites.


  Chapter 16.

    1: 
Birth of Ishmael. 1 Abram’s wife Sarai had borne him no children. Now she had an Egyptian maidservant named Hagar. 
    2: Sarai said to Abram: “The Lord has kept me from bearing children. Have intercourse with my maid; perhaps I will have sons through her.” Abram obeyed Sarai. 
    3: Thus, after Abram had lived ten years in the land of Canaan, his wife Sarai took her maid, Hagar the Egyptian, and gave her to her husband Abram to be his wife. 
    4: He had intercourse with her, and she became pregnant. As soon as Hagar knew she was pregnant, her mistress lost stature in her eyes. 
    5: 
    6: Birth of Ishmael. 1 Abram’s wife Sarai had borne him no children. Now she had an Egyptian maidservant named Hagar. 2 Sarai said to Abram: “The Lord has kept me from bearing children. Have intercourse with my maid; perhaps I will have sons through her.” Abram obeyed Sarai.[b] 3 Thus, after Abram had lived ten years in the land of Canaan, his wife Sarai took her maid, Hagar the Egyptian, and gave her to her husband Abram to be his wife. 4 He had intercourse with her, and she became pregnant. As soon as Hagar knew she was pregnant, her mistress lost stature in her eyes.[c] 5 So Sarai said to Abram: “This outrage against me is your fault. I myself gave my maid to your embrace; but ever since she knew she was pregnant, I have lost stature in her eyes. May the Lord decide between you and me!” 6 Abram told Sarai: “Your maid is in your power. Do to her what you regard as right.” Sarai then mistreated her so much that Hagar ran away from her.

    7: The Lord’s angel found her by a spring in the wilderness, the spring on the road to Shur, 
    8: and he asked, “Hagar, maid of Sarai, where have you come from and where are you going?” She answered, “I am running away from my mistress, Sarai.” 
    9: ut the Lord’s angel told her: “Go back to your mistress and submit to her authority. 
    10: I will make your descendants so numerous,” added the Lord’s angel, “that they will be too many to count.” 
    11: Then the Lord’s angel said to her:
“You are now pregnant and shall bear a son;
    you shall name him Ishmael,
For the Lord has heeded your affliction.

    12: 
He shall be a wild ass of a man,
    his hand against everyone,
    and everyone’s hand against him;
Alongside all his kindred
    shall he encamp.”

    13: To the Lord who spoke to her she gave a name, saying, “You are God who sees me”; she meant, “Have I really seen God and remained alive after he saw me?” 
    14: That is why the well is called Beer-lahai-roi. It is between Kadesh and Bered.

    15: 
    16: Birth of Ishmael. 1 Abram’s wife Sarai had borne him no children. Now she had an Egyptian maidservant named Hagar. 2 Sarai said to Abram: “The Lord has kept me from bearing children. Have intercourse with my maid; perhaps I will have sons through her.” Abram obeyed Sarai.[b] 3 Thus, after Abram had lived ten years in the land of Canaan, his wife Sarai took her maid, Hagar the Egyptian, and gave her to her husband Abram to be his wife. 4 He had intercourse with her, and she became pregnant. As soon as Hagar knew she was pregnant, her mistress lost stature in her eyes.[c] 5 So Sarai said to Abram: “This outrage against me is your fault. I myself gave my maid to your embrace; but ever since she knew she was pregnant, I have lost stature in her eyes. May the Lord decide between you and me!” 6 Abram told Sarai: “Your maid is in your power. Do to her what you regard as right.” Sarai then mistreated her so much that Hagar ran away from her.
7 The Lord’s angel[d] found her by a spring in the wilderness, the spring on the road to Shur, 8 and he asked, “Hagar, maid of Sarai, where have you come from and where are you going?” She answered, “I am running away from my mistress, Sarai.” 9 But the Lord’s angel told her: “Go back to your mistress and submit to her authority. 10 I will make your descendants so numerous,” added the Lord’s angel, “that they will be too many to count.” 11 Then the Lord’s angel said to her:
“You are now pregnant and shall bear a son;
    you shall name him Ishmael,[e]
For the Lord has heeded your affliction.
12 
He shall be a wild ass of a man,
    his hand against everyone,
    and everyone’s hand against him;
Alongside[f] all his kindred
    shall he encamp.”
13 To the Lord who spoke to her she gave a name, saying, “You are God who sees me”;[g] she meant, “Have I really seen God and remained alive after he saw me?” 14 That is why the well is called Beer-lahai-roi.[h] It is between Kadesh and Bered.
15 Hagar bore Abram a son, and Abram named the son whom Hagar bore him Ishmael. 16 Abram was eighty-six years old when Hagar bore him Ishmael.


End of day 4.