Day 38:

Reading Numbers, chapters ['29', '30', '31', '32']:

  Chapter 29.

    1: 
    2: 
On New Year’s Day. 1 In the seventh month on the first day you will declare a holy day, and do no heavy work; it shall be a day on which you sound the trumpet. 2 You will offer a burnt offering for a pleasing aroma to the Lord: one bull of the herd, one ram, and seven unblemished yearling lambs. 
    3: Their grain offerings will be of bran flour mixed with oil: three tenths of an ephah for the bull, two tenths for the ram, 
    4: and one tenth for each of the seven lambs. 
    5: One goat will be a purification offering to make atonement for yourselves. 
    6: These are in addition to the burnt offering for the new moon with its grain offering, and in addition to the regular burnt offering with its grain offering, together with the libations prescribed for them, for a pleasing aroma, an oblation to the Lord.
On the Day of Atonement. 
    7: On the tenth day of this seventh month you will declare a holy day, humble yourselves, and do no sort of work. 
    8: 
    9: n New Year’s Day. 1 In the seventh month on the first day you will declare a holy day, and do no heavy work; it shall be a day on which you sound the trumpet. 2 You will offer a burnt offering for a pleasing aroma to the Lord: one bull of the herd, one ram, and seven unblemished yearling lambs. 3 Their grain offerings will be of bran flour mixed with oil: three tenths of an ephah for the bull, two tenths for the ram, 4 and one tenth for each of the seven lambs. 5 One goat will be a purification offering to make atonement for yourselves. 6 These are in addition to the burnt offering for the new moon with its grain offering, and in addition to the regular burnt offering with its grain offering, together with the libations prescribed for them, for a pleasing aroma, an oblation to the Lord.
On the Day of Atonement. 7 On the tenth day of this seventh month[b] you will declare a holy day, humble yourselves, and do no sort of work. 8 You will offer a burnt offering to the Lord, a pleasing aroma: one bull of the herd, one ram, and seven yearling lambs that you are sure are unblemished. 9 Their grain offerings of bran flour mixed with oil: three tenths of an ephah for the bull, two tenths for the one ram, 
    10: and one tenth for each of the seven lambs. 
    11: One goat will be a purification offering. These are in addition to the purification offering for purging, the regular burnt offering with its grain offering, and their libations.
On the Feast of Booths. 
    12: On the fifteenth day of the seventh month you will declare a holy day: you shall do no heavy work. For the following seven days you will celebrate a pilgrimage feast to the Lord. 
    13: You will offer a burnt offering, an oblation of pleasing aroma to the Lord: thirteen bulls of the herd, two rams, and fourteen yearling lambs that are unblemished. 
    14: Their grain offerings will be of bran flour mixed with oil: three tenths of an ephah for each of the thirteen bulls, two tenths for each of the two rams, 
    15: and one tenth for each of the fourteen lambs. 
    16: One goat will be a purification offering. These are in addition to the regular burnt offering with its grain offering and libation.

    17: On the second day: twelve bulls of the herd, two rams, and fourteen unblemished yearling lambs, 
    18: with the grain offerings and libations for the bulls, rams and lambs in their prescribed number, 
    19: as well as one goat as a purification offering, besides the regular burnt offering with its grain offering and libation.

    20: On the third day: eleven bulls, two rams, and fourteen unblemished yearling lambs, 
    21: with the grain offerings and libations for the bulls, rams and lambs in their prescribed number, 
    22: as well as one goat for a purification offering, besides the regular burnt offering with its grain offering and libation.

    23: On the fourth day: ten bulls, two rams, and fourteen unblemished yearling lambs, 
    24: the grain offerings and libations for the bulls, rams and lambs in their prescribed number, 
    25: as well as one goat as a purification offering, besides the regular burnt offering, its grain offering and libation.

    26: On the fifth day: nine bulls, two rams, and fourteen unblemished yearling lambs, 
    27: with the grain offerings and libations for the bulls, rams and lambs in their prescribed number, 
    28: 
    29: On New Year’s Day. 1 In the seventh month on the first day you will declare a holy day, and do no heavy work; it shall be a day on which you sound the trumpet. 2 You will offer a burnt offering for a pleasing aroma to the Lord: one bull of the herd, one ram, and seven unblemished yearling lambs. 3 Their grain offerings will be of bran flour mixed with oil: three tenths of an ephah for the bull, two tenths for the ram, 4 and one tenth for each of the seven lambs. 5 One goat will be a purification offering to make atonement for yourselves. 6 These are in addition to the burnt offering for the new moon with its grain offering, and in addition to the regular burnt offering with its grain offering, together with the libations prescribed for them, for a pleasing aroma, an oblation to the Lord.
On the Day of Atonement. 7 On the tenth day of this seventh month[b] you will declare a holy day, humble yourselves, and do no sort of work. 8 You will offer a burnt offering to the Lord, a pleasing aroma: one bull of the herd, one ram, and seven yearling lambs that you are sure are unblemished. 9 Their grain offerings of bran flour mixed with oil: three tenths of an ephah for the bull, two tenths for the one ram, 10 and one tenth for each of the seven lambs. 11 One goat will be a purification offering. These are in addition to the purification offering for purging,[c] the regular burnt offering with its grain offering, and their libations.
On the Feast of Booths. 12 [d]On the fifteenth day of the seventh month you will declare a holy day: you shall do no heavy work. For the following seven days you will celebrate a pilgrimage feast to the Lord. 13 You will offer a burnt offering, an oblation of pleasing aroma to the Lord: thirteen bulls[e] of the herd, two rams, and fourteen yearling lambs that are unblemished. 14 Their grain offerings will be of bran flour mixed with oil: three tenths of an ephah for each of the thirteen bulls, two tenths for each of the two rams, 15 and one tenth for each of the fourteen lambs. 16 One goat will be a purification offering. These are in addition to the regular burnt offering with its grain offering and libation.
17 On the second day: twelve bulls of the herd, two rams, and fourteen unblemished yearling lambs, 18 with the grain offerings and libations for the bulls, rams and lambs in their prescribed number, 19 as well as one goat as a purification offering, besides the regular burnt offering with its grain offering and libation.
20 On the third day: eleven bulls, two rams, and fourteen unblemished yearling lambs, 21 with the grain offerings and libations for the bulls, rams and lambs in their prescribed number, 22 as well as one goat for a purification offering, besides the regular burnt offering with its grain offering and libation.
23 On the fourth day: ten bulls, two rams, and fourteen unblemished yearling lambs, 24 the grain offerings and libations for the bulls, rams and lambs in their prescribed number, 25 as well as one goat as a purification offering, besides the regular burnt offering, its grain offering and libation.
26 On the fifth day: nine bulls, two rams, and fourteen unblemished yearling lambs, 27 with the grain offerings and libations for the bulls, rams and lambs in their prescribed number, 28 as well as one goat as a purification offering, besides the regular burnt offering with its grain offering and libation.
29 On the sixth day: eight bulls, two rams, and fourteen unblemished yearling lambs, 
    30: with the grain offerings and libations for the bulls, rams and lambs in their prescribed number, 
    31: as well as one goat as a purification offering, besides the regular burnt offering, its grain offering and libation.

    32: On the seventh day: seven bulls, two rams, and fourteen unblemished yearling lambs, 
    33: with the grain offerings and libations for the bulls, rams and lambs in their prescribed number, 
    34: as well as one goat as a purification offering, besides the regular burnt offering, its grain offering and libation.

    35: On the eighth day you will hold a public assembly: you shall do no heavy work. 
    36: You will offer a burnt offering, an oblation of pleasing aroma to the Lord: one bull, one ram, and seven unblemished yearling lambs, 
    37: with the grain offerings and libations for the bulls, rams and lambs in their prescribed number, 
    38: as well as one goat as a purification offering, besides the regular burnt offering with its grain offering and libation.

    39: These are the offerings you will make to the Lord on your festivals, besides your votive or voluntary offerings of burnt offerings, grain offerings, libations, and communion offerings.


  Chapter 30.

    1: So Moses instructed the Israelites exactly as the Lord had commanded him.
Validity and Annulment of Vows. 
    2: 
    3: 
1 So Moses instructed the Israelites exactly as the Lord had commanded him.
Validity and Annulment of Vows. 2 Moses said to the heads of the Israelite tribes, “This is what the Lord has commanded: 3 When a man makes a vow to the Lord or binds himself under oath to a pledge, he shall not violate his word, but must fulfill exactly the promise he has uttered.

    4: “When a woman makes a vow to the Lord, or binds herself to a pledge, while still in her father’s house in her youth, 
    5: and her father learns of her vow or the pledge to which she bound herself and says nothing to her about it, then any vow or any pledge to which she bound herself remains valid. 
    6: But if on the day he learns of it her father opposes her, then any vow or any pledge to which she bound herself becomes invalid; and the Lord will release her from it, since her father opposed her.

    7: “If she marries while under a vow or under a rash pledge to which she bound herself, 
    8: and her husband learns of it, yet says nothing to her on the day he learns it, then the vows or the pledges to which she bound herself remain valid. 
    9: ut if on the day her husband learns of it he opposes her, he thereby annuls the vow she had made or the rash pledge to which she had bound herself, and the Lord will release her from it. 
    10: (The vow of a widow or of a divorced woman, however, any pledge to which such a woman binds herself, is valid.)

    11: “If it is in her husband’s house that she makes a vow or binds herself under oath to a pledge, 
    12: and her husband learns of it yet says nothing to her to oppose her, then all her vows remain valid or any pledge to which she has bound herself. 
    13: But if on the day he learns of them her husband annuls them, then whatever she has expressly promised in her vows or in her pledge becomes invalid; since her husband has annulled them, the Lord will release her from them.

    14: “Any vow or any pledge that she makes under oath to humble herself, her husband may either confirm or annul. 
    15: But if her husband, day after day, says nothing at all to her, he thereby confirms all her vows or all the pledges incumbent upon her; he has confirmed them, because on the day he learned of them he said nothing to her. 
    16: If, however, he annuls them some time after he first learned of them, he will be responsible for her guilt.”

    17: These are the statutes which the Lord commanded Moses concerning a husband and his wife, as well as a father and his daughter while she is still in her youth in her father’s house.


  Chapter 31.

    1: Campaign Against the Midianites. 1 The Lord said to Moses: 
    2: 
    3: 
Campaign Against the Midianites. 1 The Lord said to Moses: 2 Avenge the Israelites on the Midianites, and then you will be gathered to your people. 3 So Moses told the people, “Arm some men among you for the campaign, to attack Midian and to execute the Lord’s vengeance on Midian. 
    4: From each of the tribes of Israel you will send a thousand men to the campaign.” 
    5: From the contingents of Israel, therefore, a thousand men of each tribe were levied, so that there were twelve thousand men armed for war. 
    6: Moses sent them out on the campaign, a thousand from each tribe, with Phinehas, son of Eleazar, the priest for the campaign, who had with him the sacred vessels and the trumpets for sounding the alarm. 
    7: They waged war against the Midianites, as the Lord had commanded Moses, and killed every male. 
    8: Besides those slain in battle, they killed the kings of Midian: Evi, Rekem, Zur, Hur and Reba, the five kings of Midian; and they also killed Balaam, son of Beor, with the sword. 
    9: ut the Israelites took captive the women of the Midianites with their children, and all their herds and flocks and wealth as loot, 
    10: while they set on fire all the towns where they had settled and all their encampments. 
    11: Then they took all the plunder, with the people and animals they had captured, and brought the captives, together with the spoils and plunder, 
    12: to Moses and Eleazar the priest and to the Israelite community at their camp on the plains of Moab by the Jordan opposite Jericho.
Treatment of the Captives. 
    13: When Moses and Eleazar the priest, with all the leaders of the community, went outside the camp to meet them, 
    14: Moses became angry with the officers of the army, the commanders of thousands and the commanders of hundreds, who were returning from the military campaign. 
    15: “So you have spared all the women!” he exclaimed. 
    16: “These are the very ones who on Balaam’s advice were behind the Israelites’ unfaithfulness to the Lord in the affair at Peor, so that plague struck the Lord’s community. 
    17: Now kill, therefore, every male among the children and kill every woman who has had sexual relations with a man. 
    18: But you may spare for yourselves all the girls who have not had sexual relations.
Purification After Combat. 
    19: “Moreover, remain outside the camp for seven days; every one of you who has killed anyone or touched someone killed will purify yourselves on the third and on the seventh day—both you and your captives. 
    20: You will also purify every garment, every article of leather, everything made of goats’ hair, and every article of wood.”

    21: Eleazar the priest told the soldiers who had taken part in the battle: “This is the prescribed ritual which the Lord has commanded Moses: 
    22: gold, silver, bronze, iron, tin and lead— 
    23: whatever can stand fire—you shall put into the fire, that it may become clean; however, it must also be purified with water of purification. But whatever cannot stand fire you must put into the water. 
    24: On the seventh day you will wash your garments, and then you will again be clean. After that you may enter the camp.”
Division of the Spoils. 
    25: The Lord said to Moses: 
    26: With the help of Eleazar the priest and of the heads of the ancestral houses of the community, inventory all the spoils captured, human being and beast alike; 
    27: then divide the spoils between the warriors who went on the campaign and the whole community. 
    28: You will levy a tax for the Lord on the soldiers who went on the campaign: one out of every five hundred persons, oxen, donkeys, and sheep. 
    29: From their half you will take it and give it to Eleazar the priest as a contribution to the Lord. 
    30: 
    31: Campaign Against the Midianites. 1 The Lord said to Moses: 2 Avenge the Israelites on the Midianites, and then you will be gathered to your people. 3 So Moses told the people, “Arm some men among you for the campaign, to attack Midian and to execute the Lord’s vengeance on Midian. 4 From each of the tribes of Israel you will send a thousand men to the campaign.” 5 From the contingents of Israel, therefore, a thousand men of each tribe were levied, so that there were twelve thousand men armed for war. 6 Moses sent them out on the campaign, a thousand from each tribe, with Phinehas, son of Eleazar, the priest for the campaign, who had with him the sacred vessels and the trumpets for sounding the alarm. 7 They waged war against the Midianites, as the Lord had commanded Moses, and killed every male. 8 Besides those slain in battle, they killed the kings of Midian: Evi, Rekem, Zur, Hur and Reba, the five kings of Midian;[b] and they also killed Balaam, son of Beor, with the sword. 9 But the Israelites took captive the women of the Midianites with their children, and all their herds and flocks and wealth as loot, 10 while they set on fire all the towns where they had settled and all their encampments. 11 Then they took all the plunder, with the people and animals they had captured, and brought the captives, together with the spoils and plunder, 12 to Moses and Eleazar the priest and to the Israelite community at their camp on the plains of Moab by the Jordan opposite Jericho.
Treatment of the Captives. 13 When Moses and Eleazar the priest, with all the leaders of the community, went outside the camp to meet them, 14 Moses became angry with the officers of the army, the commanders of thousands and the commanders of hundreds, who were returning from the military campaign. 15 “So you have spared all the women!” he exclaimed. 16 “These are the very ones who on Balaam’s advice were behind the Israelites’ unfaithfulness to the Lord in the affair at Peor, so that plague struck the Lord’s community. 17 [c]Now kill, therefore, every male among the children and kill every woman who has had sexual relations with a man. 18 But you may spare for yourselves all the girls who have not had sexual relations.
Purification After Combat. 19 “Moreover, remain outside the camp for seven days; every one of you who has killed anyone or touched someone killed will purify yourselves on the third and on the seventh day—both you and your captives. 20 You will also purify every garment, every article of leather, everything made of goats’ hair, and every article of wood.”
21 Eleazar the priest told the soldiers who had taken part in the battle: “This is the prescribed ritual which the Lord has commanded Moses: 22 gold, silver, bronze, iron, tin and lead— 23 whatever can stand fire—you shall put into the fire, that it may become clean; however, it must also be purified with water of purification.[d] But whatever cannot stand fire you must put into the water. 24 On the seventh day you will wash your garments, and then you will again be clean. After that you may enter the camp.”
Division of the Spoils. 25 The Lord said to Moses: 26 With the help of Eleazar the priest and of the heads of the ancestral houses of the community, inventory all the spoils captured, human being and beast alike; 27 then divide the spoils[e] between the warriors who went on the campaign and the whole community. 28 You will levy a tax for the Lord on the soldiers who went on the campaign: one out of every five hundred persons, oxen, donkeys, and sheep. 29 From their half you will take it and give it to Eleazar the priest as a contribution to the Lord. 30 From the Israelites’ half you will take one captive from every fifty human beings, oxen, donkeys, and sheep—all the animals—and give them to the Levites, who perform the duties of the Lord’s tabernacle. 31 So Moses and Eleazar the priest did this, as the Lord had commanded Moses.
Amount of the Plunder. 
    32: This plunder, what was left of the loot which the troops had taken, amounted to six hundred and seventy-five thousand sheep, 
    33: seventy-two thousand oxen, 
    34: sixty-one thousand donkeys, 
    35: and thirty-two thousand women who had not had sexual relations.

    36: The half-share that fell to those who had gone out on the campaign was in number: three hundred and thirty-seven thousand five hundred sheep, 
    37: of which six hundred and seventy-five fell as tax to the Lord; 
    38: thirty-six thousand oxen, of which seventy-two fell as tax to the Lord; 
    39: thirty thousand five hundred donkeys, of which sixty-one fell as tax to the Lord; 
    40: and sixteen thousand persons, of whom thirty-two persons fell as tax to the Lord. 
    41: Moses gave the taxes contributed to the Lord to Eleazar the priest, exactly as the Lord had commanded Moses.

    42: As for the Israelites’ half, which Moses had taken from the men who had fought— 
    43: the community’s half was three hundred and thirty-seven thousand five hundred sheep, 
    44: thirty-six thousand oxen, 
    45: thirty thousand five hundred donkeys, 
    46: and sixteen thousand persons. 
    47: From the Israelites’ half, Moses took one captive from every fifty, from human being and beast alike, and gave them to the Levites, who performed the duties of the Lord’s tabernacle, exactly as the Lord had commanded Moses.
Gifts of the Officers. 
    48: Then those who were officers over the contingents of the army, commanders of thousands and commanders of hundreds, came up to Moses 
    49: and said to him, “Your servants have counted the soldiers under our command, and not one of us is missing. 
    50: So, we have brought as an offering to the Lord articles of gold that each of us has picked up—anklets, bracelets, rings, earrings, or pendants—to make atonement for ourselves before the Lord.” 
    51: Moses and Eleazar the priest accepted the gold from them, all fashioned pieces. 
    52: The gold that was given as a contribution to the Lord—from the commanders of thousands and the commanders of hundreds—amounted in all to sixteen thousand seven hundred and fifty shekels. 
    53: What the common soldiers had looted each one kept for himself. 
    54: So Moses and Eleazar the priest accepted the gold from the commanders of thousands and of hundreds, and put it in the tent of meeting as a reminder on behalf of the Israelites before the Lord.


  Chapter 32.

    1: 
    2: 
    3: 
Request of Gad and Reuben. 1 Now the Reubenites and Gadites had a very large number of livestock. Noticing that the land of Jazer and of Gilead was a place suited to livestock, 2 the Gadites and Reubenites came to Moses and Eleazar the priest and to the leaders of the community and said, 3 [b]“The region of Ataroth, Dibon, Jazer, Nimrah, Heshbon, Elealeh, Sebam, Nebo and Baal-meon— 
    4: the land which the Lord has laid low before the community of Israel, is a land for livestock, and your servants have livestock.” 
    5: They continued, “If we find favor with you, let this land be given to your servants as their possession. Do not make us cross the Jordan.”
Moses’ Rebuke. 
    6: But Moses answered the Gadites and Reubenites: “Are your kindred, then, to go to war, while you remain here? 
    7: Why do you wish to discourage the Israelites from crossing to the land the Lord has given them? 
    8: That is just what your ancestors did when I sent them from Kadesh-barnea to reconnoiter the land. 
    9: hey went up to the Wadi Eshcol and reconnoitered the land, then so discouraged the Israelites that they would not enter the land the Lord had given them. 
    10: At that time the anger of the Lord flared up, and he swore: 
    11: None of the men twenty years old or more who have come up from Egypt will see the land I promised under oath to Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, because they have not followed me unreservedly— 
    12: except the Kenizzite Caleb, son of Jephunneh, the Kenizzite, and Joshua, son of Nun, since they have followed the Lord unreservedly. 
    13: So the anger of the Lord flared up against the Israelites and he made them wander in the wilderness forty years, until the whole generation that had done evil in the sight of the Lord had disappeared. 
    14: And now here you are, offspring of sinful stock, rising up in your ancestors’ place to add still more to the Lord’s blazing anger against the Israelites. 
    15: If you turn away from following him, he will again abandon them in the wilderness, and you will bring about the ruin of this entire people.”
Counter Proposal. 
    16: But they approached him and said: “We will only build sheepfolds here for our flocks and towns for our families; 
    17: but we ourselves will march as troops in the vanguard before the Israelites, until we have led them to their destination. Meanwhile our families will remain in the fortified towns because of the land’s inhabitants. 
    18: We will not return to our homes until all the Israelites have taken possession of their heritage. 
    19: But we will not claim any heritage with them across the Jordan and beyond, because we have received a heritage for ourselves on the eastern side of the Jordan.”
Agreement Reached. 
    20: Moses said to them in reply: “If you do this—if you march as troops before the Lord into battle 
    21: and cross the Jordan in full force before the Lord until he has driven his enemies out of his way 
    22: and the land is subdued before the Lord, then you may return here, free from every obligation to the Lord and to Israel, and this land will be your possession before the Lord. 
    23: But if you do not do this, you will have sinned against the Lord, and you can be sure that the consequences of your sin will overtake you. 
    24: Build the towns, then, for your families, and the folds for your flocks, but fulfill what you have promised.”

    25: The Gadites and Reubenites answered Moses, “Your servants will do as my lord commands. 
    26: While our wives and children, our livestock and other animals remain there in the towns of Gilead, 
    27: all your servants will go across as armed troops before the Lord to battle, just as my lord says.”

    28: So Moses gave this command in their regard to Eleazar the priest, to Joshua, son of Nun, and to the heads of the ancestral houses of the Israelite tribes: 
    29: He said to them, “If all the Gadites and Reubenites cross the Jordan with you in full force before the Lord into battle, the land will be subdued before you, and you will give them Gilead as a possession. 
    30: But if they will not go across in force with you before the Lord, you will bring their wives and children and livestock across before you into Canaan, and they will possess a holding among you in the land of Canaan.”

    31: 
    32: Request of Gad and Reuben. 1 Now the Reubenites and Gadites had a very large number of livestock. Noticing that the land of Jazer and of Gilead was a place suited to livestock, 2 the Gadites and Reubenites came to Moses and Eleazar the priest and to the leaders of the community and said, 3 [b]“The region of Ataroth, Dibon, Jazer, Nimrah, Heshbon, Elealeh, Sebam, Nebo and Baal-meon— 4 the land which the Lord has laid low before the community of Israel, is a land for livestock, and your servants have livestock.” 5 They continued, “If we find favor with you, let this land be given to your servants as their possession. Do not make us cross the Jordan.”
Moses’ Rebuke. 6 But Moses answered the Gadites and Reubenites: “Are your kindred, then, to go to war, while you remain here? 7 Why do you wish to discourage the Israelites from crossing to the land the Lord has given them? 8 That is just what your ancestors did when I sent them from Kadesh-barnea to reconnoiter the land. 9 They went up to the Wadi Eshcol and reconnoitered the land, then so discouraged the Israelites that they would not enter the land the Lord had given them. 10 At that time the anger of the Lord flared up, and he swore: 11 None of the men twenty years old or more who have come up from Egypt will see the land I promised under oath to Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, because they have not followed me unreservedly— 12 except the Kenizzite[c] Caleb, son of Jephunneh, the Kenizzite, and Joshua, son of Nun, since they have followed the Lord unreservedly. 13 So the anger of the Lord flared up against the Israelites and he made them wander in the wilderness forty years, until the whole generation that had done evil in the sight of the Lord had disappeared. 14 And now here you are, offspring of sinful stock, rising up in your ancestors’ place to add still more to the Lord’s blazing anger against the Israelites. 15 If you turn away from following him, he will again abandon them in the wilderness, and you will bring about the ruin of this entire people.”
Counter Proposal. 16 But they approached him and said: “We will only build sheepfolds here for our flocks and towns for our families; 17 but we ourselves will march as troops in the vanguard before the Israelites, until we have led them to their destination. Meanwhile our families will remain in the fortified towns because of the land’s inhabitants. 18 We will not return to our homes until all the Israelites have taken possession of their heritage. 19 But we will not claim any heritage with them across the Jordan and beyond, because we have received a heritage for ourselves on the eastern side of the Jordan.”
Agreement Reached. 20 [d]Moses said to them in reply: “If you do this—if you march as troops before the Lord into battle 21 and cross the Jordan in full force before the Lord until he has driven his enemies out of his way 22 and the land is subdued before the Lord, then you may return here, free from every obligation to the Lord and to Israel, and this land will be your possession before the Lord. 23 But if you do not do this, you will have sinned against the Lord, and you can be sure that the consequences of your sin will overtake you. 24 Build the towns, then, for your families, and the folds for your flocks, but fulfill what you have promised.”
25 The Gadites and Reubenites answered Moses, “Your servants will do as my lord commands. 26 While our wives and children, our livestock and other animals remain there in the towns of Gilead, 27 all your servants will go across as armed troops before the Lord to battle, just as my lord says.”
28 So Moses gave this command in their regard to Eleazar the priest, to Joshua, son of Nun, and to the heads of the ancestral houses of the Israelite tribes: 29 He said to them, “If all the Gadites and Reubenites cross the Jordan with you in full force before the Lord into battle, the land will be subdued before you, and you will give them Gilead as a possession. 30 But if they will not go across in force with you before the Lord, you will bring their wives and children and livestock across before you into Canaan, and they will possess a holding among you in the land of Canaan.”
31 To this the Gadites and Reubenites replied, “We will do what the Lord has ordered your servants. 32 We ourselves will go across in force before the Lord into the land of Canaan, but we will retain our hereditary property on this side of the Jordan.”[e] 
    33: So Moses gave them—the Gadites and Reubenites, as well as half the tribe of Manasseh, son of Joseph—the kingdom of Sihon, king of the Amorites, and the kingdom of Og, king of Bashan, the land with its towns, and the districts of the surrounding towns.

    34: The Gadites rebuilt the cities of Dibon, Ataroth, Aroer, 
    35: Atroth-shophan, Jazer, Jogbehah, 
    36: Beth-nimrah and Beth-haran—fortified cities—and sheepfolds. 
    37: The Reubenites rebuilt Heshbon, Elealeh, Kiriathaim, 
    38: Nebo, Baal-meon (names to be changed!), and Sibmah. These towns, which they rebuilt, they called by their old names.
Other Conquests. 
    39: The descendants of Machir, son of Manasseh, went to Gilead and captured it, dispossessing the Amorites who were there. 
    40: (Moses gave Gilead to Machir, son of Manasseh, and he settled there.) 
    41: Jair, a descendant of Manasseh, went and captured their tent villages, and called them Havvoth-jair. 
    42: Nobah went and captured Kenath with its dependencies and called it Nobah after his own name.


End of day 38.