Day 326:

Reading Galatians, chapters ['5', '6']:

  Chapter 5.

    1: For freedom Christ set us free; so stand firm and do not submit again to the yoke of slavery.

    2: It is I, Paul, who am telling you that if you have yourselves circumcised, Christ will be of no benefit to you. 
    3: Once again I declare to every man who has himself circumcised that he is bound to observe the entire law. 
    4: 
    5: The Importance of Faith. 1 For freedom[b] Christ set us free; so stand firm and do not submit again to the yoke of slavery.
2 It is I, Paul, who am telling you that if you have yourselves circumcised, Christ will be of no benefit to you. 3 Once again I declare to every man who has himself circumcised that he is bound to observe the entire law.[c] 4 You are separated from Christ, you who are trying to be justified by law; you have fallen from grace. 5 For through the Spirit, by faith, we await the hope of righteousness. 
    6: For in Christ Jesus, neither circumcision nor uncircumcision counts for anything, but only faith working through love.
Be Not Misled.[e] 
    7: You were running well; who hindered you from following [the] truth? 
    8: That enticement does not come from the one who called you. 
    9:  little yeast leavens the whole batch of dough. 
    10: I am confident of you in the Lord that you will not take a different view, and that the one who is troubling you will bear the condemnation, whoever he may be. 
    11: As for me, brothers, if I am still preaching circumcision, why am I still being persecuted? In that case, the stumbling block of the cross has been abolished. 
    12: Would that those who are upsetting you might also castrate themselves!
Freedom for Service.[j] 
    13: For you were called for freedom, brothers. But do not use this freedom as an opportunity for the flesh; rather, serve one another through love. 
    14: For the whole law is fulfilled in one statement, namely, “You shall love your neighbor as yourself.” 
    15: But if you go on biting and devouring one another, beware that you are not consumed by one another.

    16: I say, then: live by the Spirit and you will certainly not gratify the desire of the flesh. 
    17: For the flesh has desires against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; these are opposed to each other, so that you may not do what you want. 
    18: But if you are guided by the Spirit, you are not under the law. 
    19: Now the works of the flesh are obvious: immorality, impurity, licentiousness, 
    20: idolatry, sorcery, hatreds, rivalry, jealousy, outbursts of fury, acts of selfishness, dissensions, factions, 
    21: occasions of envy, drinking bouts, orgies, and the like. I warn you, as I warned you before, that those who do such things will not inherit the kingdom of God. 
    22: In contrast, the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, generosity, faithfulness, 
    23: gentleness, self-control. Against such there is no law. 
    24: Now those who belong to Christ  have crucified their flesh with its passions and desires. 
    25: If we live in the Spirit, let us also follow the Spirit. 
    26: Let us not be conceited, provoking one another, envious of one another.


  Chapter 6.

    1: Brothers, even if a person is caught in some transgression, you who are spiritual should correct that one in a gentle spirit, looking to yourself, so that you also may not be tempted. 
    2: Bear one another’s burdens, and so you will fulfill the law of Christ. 
    3: For if anyone thinks he is something when he is nothing, he is deluding himself. 
    4: Each one must examine his own work, and then he will have reason to boast with regard to himself alone, and not with regard to someone else; 
    5: 
    6: Life in the Community of Christ. 1 Brothers, even if a person is caught in some transgression, you who are spiritual should correct that one in a gentle spirit, looking to yourself, so that you also may not be tempted. 2 Bear one another’s burdens, and so you will fulfill the law of Christ.[b] 3 For if anyone thinks he is something when he is nothing, he is deluding himself. 4 [c]Each one must examine his own work, and then he will have reason to boast with regard to himself alone, and not with regard to someone else; 5 for each will bear his own load.
6 One who is being instructed in the word should share all good things with his instructor.[d] 
    7: Make no mistake: God is not mocked, for a person will reap only what he sows, 
    8: because the one who sows for his flesh will reap corruption from the flesh, but the one who sows for the spirit will reap eternal life from the spirit. 
    9: et us not grow tired of doing good, for in due time we shall reap our harvest, if we do not give up. 
    10: So then, while we have the opportunity, let us do good to all, but especially to those who belong to the family of the faith.
VI. Conclusion
Final Appeal.[f] 
    11: See with what large letters I am writing to you in my own hand! 
    12: It is those who want to make a good appearance in the flesh who are trying to compel you to have yourselves circumcised, only that they may not be persecuted for the cross of Christ. 
    13: Not even those having themselves circumcised observe the law themselves; they only want you to be circumcised so that they may boast of your flesh. 
    14: But may I never boast except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through which the world has been crucified to me, and I to the world. 
    15: For neither does circumcision mean anything, nor does uncircumcision, but only a new creation. 
    16: Peace and mercy be to all who follow this rule and to the Israel of God.

    17: From now on, let no one make troubles for me; for I bear the marks of Jesus on my body.

    18: The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit, brothers. Amen.


End of day 326.