Day 292:

Reading Mark, chapters ['9', '10', '11', '12']:

  Chapter 9.

    1: He also said to them, “Amen, I say to you, there are some standing here who will not taste death until they see that the kingdom of God has come in power.”
The Transfiguration of Jesus.[b] 
    2: After six days Jesus took Peter, James, and John and led them up a high mountain apart by themselves. And he was transfigured before them, 
    3: and his clothes became dazzling white, such as no fuller on earth could bleach them. 
    4: Then Elijah appeared to them along with Moses, and they were conversing with Jesus. 
    5: Then Peter said to Jesus in reply, “Rabbi, it is good that we are here! Let us make three tents: one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.” 
    6: He hardly knew what to say, they were so terrified. 
    7: Then a cloud came, casting a shadow over them; then from the cloud came a voice, “This is my beloved Son. Listen to him.” 
    8: 
    9:  He also said to them, “Amen, I say to you, there are some standing here who will not taste death until they see that the kingdom of God has come in power.”
The Transfiguration of Jesus.[b] 2 After six days Jesus took Peter, James, and John and led them up a high mountain apart by themselves. And he was transfigured before them, 3 and his clothes became dazzling white, such as no fuller on earth could bleach them. 4 Then Elijah appeared to them along with Moses, and they were conversing with Jesus. 5 [c]Then Peter said to Jesus in reply, “Rabbi, it is good that we are here! Let us make three tents: one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.” 6 He hardly knew what to say, they were so terrified. 7 Then a cloud came, casting a shadow over them;[d] then from the cloud came a voice, “This is my beloved Son. Listen to him.” 8 Suddenly, looking around, they no longer saw anyone but Jesus alone with them.
The Coming of Elijah.[e] 9 As they were coming down from the mountain, he charged them not to relate what they had seen to anyone, except when the Son of Man had risen from the dead. 
    10: So they kept the matter to themselves, questioning what rising from the dead meant. 
    11: Then they asked him, “Why do the scribes say that Elijah must come first?” 
    12: He told them, “Elijah will indeed come first and restore all things, yet how is it written regarding the Son of Man that he must suffer greatly and be treated with contempt? 
    13: But I tell you that Elijah has come and they did to him whatever they pleased, as it is written of him.”
The Healing of a Boy with a Demon. 
    14: When they came to the disciples, they saw a large crowd around them and scribes arguing with them. 
    15: Immediately on seeing him, the whole crowd was utterly amazed. They ran up to him and greeted him. 
    16: He asked them, “What are you arguing about with them?” 
    17: Someone from the crowd answered him, “Teacher, I have brought to you my son possessed by a mute spirit. 
    18: Wherever it seizes him, it throws him down; he foams at the mouth, grinds his teeth, and becomes rigid. I asked your disciples to drive it out, but they were unable to do so.” 
    19: He said to them in reply, “O faithless generation, how long will I be with you? How long will I endure you? Bring him to me.” 
    20: They brought the boy to him. And when he saw him, the spirit immediately threw the boy into convulsions. As he fell to the ground, he began to roll around and foam at the mouth. 
    21: Then he questioned his father, “How long has this been happening to him?” He replied, “Since childhood. 
    22: It has often thrown him into fire and into water to kill him. But if you can do anything, have compassion on us and help us.” 
    23: Jesus said to him, “‘If you can!’ Everything is possible to one who has faith.” 
    24: Then the boy’s father cried out, “I do believe, help my unbelief!” 
    25: Jesus, on seeing a crowd rapidly gathering, rebuked the unclean spirit and said to it, “Mute and deaf spirit, I command you: come out of him and never enter him again!” 
    26: Shouting and throwing the boy into convulsions, it came out. He became like a corpse, which caused many to say, “He is dead!” 
    27: But Jesus took him by the hand, raised him, and he stood up. 
    28: When he entered the house, his disciples asked him in private, “Why could we not drive it out?” 
    29: He said to them, “This kind can only come out through prayer.”
The Second Prediction of the Passion. 
    30: They left from there and began a journey through Galilee, but he did not wish anyone to know about it. 
    31: He was teaching his disciples and telling them, “The Son of Man is to be handed over to men and they will kill him, and three days after his death he will rise.” 
    32: But they did not understand the saying, and they were afraid to question him.
IV. The Full Revelation of the Mystery
The Greatest in the Kingdom. 
    33: They came to Capernaum and, once inside the house, he began to ask them, “What were you arguing about on the way?” 
    34: But they remained silent. They had been discussing among themselves on the way who was the greatest. 
    35: Then he sat down, called the Twelve, and said to them, “If anyone wishes to be first, he shall be the last of all and the servant of all.” 
    36: Taking a child he placed it in their midst, and putting his arms around it he said to them, 
    37: “Whoever receives one child such as this in my name, receives me; and whoever receives me, receives not me but the One who sent me.”
Another Exorcist. 
    38: John said to him, “Teacher, we saw someone driving out demons in your name, and we tried to prevent him because he does not follow us.” 
    39: Jesus replied, “Do not prevent him. There is no one who performs a mighty deed in my name who can at the same time speak ill of me. 
    40: For whoever is not against us is for us. 
    41: Anyone who gives you a cup of water to drink because you belong to Christ, amen, I say to you, will surely not lose his reward.
Temptations to Sin. 
    42: “Whoever causes one of these little ones who believe  to sin, it would be better for him if a great millstone were put around his neck and he were thrown into the sea. 
    43: If your hand causes you to sin, cut it off. It is better for you to enter into life maimed than with two hands to go into Gehenna, into the unquenchable fire. 
    44: ][k] 
    45: And if your foot causes you to sin, cut it off. It is better for you to enter into life crippled than with two feet to be thrown into Gehenna. 
    46: ] 
    47: And if your eye causes you to sin, pluck it out. Better for you to enter into the kingdom of God with one eye than with two eyes to be thrown into Gehenna, 
    48: where ‘their worm does not die, and the fire is not quenched.’
The Simile of Salt. 
    49: “Everyone will be salted with fire. 
    50: Salt is good, but if salt becomes insipid, with what will you restore its flavor? Keep salt in yourselves and you will have peace with one another.”


  Chapter 10.

    1: 
Marriage and Divorce. 1 He set out from there and went into the district of Judea  across the Jordan. Again crowds gathered around him and, as was his custom, he again taught them. 
    2: The Pharisees approached and asked, “Is it lawful for a husband to divorce his wife?” They were testing him. 
    3: He said to them in reply, “What did Moses command you?” 
    4: They replied, “Moses permitted him to write a bill of divorce and dismiss her.” 
    5: But Jesus told them, “Because of the hardness of your hearts he wrote you this commandment. 
    6: But from the beginning of creation, ‘God made them male and female. 
    7: For this reason a man shall leave his father and mother , 
    8: and the two shall become one flesh.’ So they are no longer two but one flesh. 
    9: 
    10: Marriage and Divorce. 1 He set out from there and went into the district of Judea  across the Jordan. Again crowds gathered around him and, as was his custom, he again taught them. 2 [a]The Pharisees approached and asked, “Is it lawful for a husband to divorce his wife?” They were testing him. 3 He said to them in reply, “What did Moses command you?” 4 They replied, “Moses permitted him to write a bill of divorce and dismiss her.” 5 But Jesus told them, “Because of the hardness of your hearts he wrote you this commandment. 6 But from the beginning of creation, ‘God made them male and female. 7 For this reason a man shall leave his father and mother [and be joined to his wife], 8 and the two shall become one flesh.’ So they are no longer two but one flesh. 9 Therefore what God has joined together, no human being must separate.” 10 In the house the disciples again questioned him about this. 
    11: He said to them, “Whoever divorces his wife and marries another commits adultery against her; 
    12: and if she divorces her husband and marries another, she commits adultery.”
Blessing of the Children. 
    13: And people were bringing children to him that he might touch them, but the disciples rebuked them. 
    14: When Jesus saw this he became indignant and said to them, “Let the children come to me; do not prevent them, for the kingdom of God belongs to such as these. 
    15: Amen, I say to you, whoever does not accept the kingdom of God like a child will not enter it.” 
    16: Then he embraced them and blessed them, placing his hands on them.
The Rich Man. 
    17: As he was setting out on a journey, a man ran up, knelt down before him, and asked him, “Good teacher, what must I do to inherit eternal life?” 
    18: Jesus answered him, “Why do you call me good? No one is good but God alone. 
    19: You know the commandments: ‘You shall not kill; you shall not commit adultery; you shall not steal; you shall not bear false witness; you shall not defraud; honor your father and your mother.’” 
    20: He replied and said to him, “Teacher, all of these I have observed from my youth.” 
    21: Jesus, looking at him, loved him and said to him, “You are lacking in one thing. Go, sell what you have, and give to  poor and you will have treasure in heaven; then come, follow me.” 
    22: At that statement his face fell, and he went away sad, for he had many possessions.

    23: Jesus looked around and said to his disciples, “How hard it is for those who have wealth to enter the kingdom of God!” 
    24: The disciples were amazed at his words. So Jesus again said to them in reply, “Children, how hard it is to enter the kingdom of God! 
    25: It is easier for a camel to pass through  eye of [a] needle than for one who is rich to enter the kingdom of God.” 
    26: They were exceedingly astonished and said among themselves, “Then who can be saved?” 
    27: Jesus looked at them and said, “For human beings it is impossible, but not for God. All things are possible for God.” 
    28: Peter began to say to him, “We have given up everything and followed you.” 
    29: Jesus said, “Amen, I say to you, there is no one who has given up house or brothers or sisters or mother or father or children or lands for my sake and for the sake of the gospel 
    30: who will not receive a hundred times more now in this present age: houses and brothers and sisters and mothers and children and lands, with persecutions, and eternal life in the age to come. 
    31: But many that are first will be last, and  last will be first.”
The Third Prediction of the Passion. 
    32: They were on the way, going up to Jerusalem, and Jesus went ahead of them. They were amazed, and those who followed were afraid. Taking the Twelve aside again, he began to tell them what was going to happen to him. 
    33: “Behold, we are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be handed over to the chief priests and the scribes, and they will condemn him to death and hand him over to the Gentiles 
    34: who will mock him, spit upon him, scourge him, and put him to death, but after three days he will rise.”
Ambition of James and John. 
    35: Then James and John, the sons of Zebedee, came to him and said to him, “Teacher, we want you to do for us whatever we ask of you.” 
    36: He replied, “What do you wish  to do for you?” 
    37: They answered him, “Grant that in your glory we may sit one at your right and the other at your left.” 
    38: Jesus said to them, “You do not know what you are asking. Can you drink the cup that I drink or be baptized with the baptism with which I am baptized?” 
    39: They said to him, “We can.” Jesus said to them, “The cup that I drink, you will drink, and with the baptism with which I am baptized, you will be baptized; 
    40: but to sit at my right or at my left is not mine to give but is for those for whom it has been prepared.” 
    41: When the ten heard this, they became indignant at James and John. 
    42: Jesus summoned them and said to them, “You know that those who are recognized as rulers over the Gentiles lord it over them, and their great ones make their authority over them felt. 
    43: But it shall not be so among you. Rather, whoever wishes to be great among you will be your servant; 
    44: whoever wishes to be first among you will be the slave of all. 
    45: For the Son of Man did not come to be served but to serve and to give his life as a ransom for many.”
The Blind Bartimaeus. 
    46: They came to Jericho. And as he was leaving Jericho with his disciples and a sizable crowd, Bartimaeus, a blind man, the son of Timaeus, sat by the roadside begging. 
    47: On hearing that it was Jesus of Nazareth, he began to cry out and say, “Jesus, son of David, have pity on me.” 
    48: And many rebuked him, telling him to be silent. But he kept calling out all the more, “Son of David, have pity on me.” 
    49: Jesus stopped and said, “Call him.” So they called the blind man, saying to him, “Take courage; get up, he is calling you.” 
    50: He threw aside his cloak, sprang up, and came to Jesus. 
    51: Jesus said to him in reply, “What do you want me to do for you?” The blind man replied to him, “Master, I want to see.” 
    52: Jesus told him, “Go your way; your faith has saved you.” Immediately he received his sight and followed him on the way.


  Chapter 11.

    1: 
The Entry into Jerusalem. 1 When they drew near to Jerusalem, to Bethphage and Bethany at the Mount of Olives, he sent two of his disciples 
    2: and said to them, “Go into the village opposite you, and immediately on entering it, you will find a colt tethered on which no one has ever sat. Untie it and bring it here. 
    3: If anyone should say to you, ‘Why are you doing this?’ reply, ‘The Master has need of it and will send it back here at once.’” 
    4: So they went off and found a colt tethered at a gate outside on the street, and they untied it. 
    5: Some of the bystanders said to them, “What are you doing, untying the colt?” 
    6: They answered them just as Jesus had told them to, and they permitted them to do it. 
    7: So they brought the colt to Jesus and put their cloaks over it. And he sat on it. 
    8: Many people spread their cloaks on the road, and others spread leafy branches that they had cut from the fields. 
    9: hose preceding him as well as those following kept crying out:
“Hosanna!
    Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord!

    10: 
    11: The Entry into Jerusalem. 1 When they drew near to Jerusalem, to Bethphage and Bethany at the Mount of Olives, he sent two of his disciples 2 and said to them, “Go into the village opposite you, and immediately on entering it, you will find a colt tethered on which no one has ever sat. Untie it and bring it here. 3 If anyone should say to you, ‘Why are you doing this?’ reply, ‘The Master has need of it and will send it back here at once.’” 4 So they went off and found a colt tethered at a gate outside on the street, and they untied it. 5 Some of the bystanders said to them, “What are you doing, untying the colt?” 6 They answered them just as Jesus had told them to, and they permitted them to do it. 7 So they brought the colt to Jesus and put their cloaks over it. And he sat on it. 8 Many people spread their cloaks on the road, and others spread leafy branches that they had cut from the fields. 9 Those preceding him as well as those following kept crying out:
“Hosanna!
    Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord!
10 
    Blessed is the kingdom of our father David that is to come!
Hosanna in the highest!”
11 He entered Jerusalem and went into the temple area. He looked around at everything and, since it was already late, went out to Bethany with the Twelve.
Jesus Curses a Fig Tree.[b] 
    12: The next day as they were leaving Bethany he was hungry. 
    13: Seeing from a distance a fig tree in leaf, he went over to see if he could find anything on it. When he reached it he found nothing but leaves; it was not the time for figs. 
    14: And he said to it in reply, “May no one ever eat of your fruit again!” And his disciples heard it.
Cleansing of the Temple. 
    15: They came to Jerusalem, and on entering the temple area he began to drive out those selling and buying there. He overturned the tables of the money changers and the seats of those who were selling doves. 
    16: He did not permit anyone to carry anything through the temple area. 
    17: Then he taught them saying, “Is it not written:
‘My house shall be called a house of prayer for all peoples’?
    But you have made it a den of thieves.”

    18: The chief priests and the scribes came to hear of it and were seeking a way to put him to death, yet they feared him because the whole crowd was astonished at his teaching. 
    19: When evening came, they went out of the city.
The Withered Fig Tree. 
    20: Early in the morning, as they were walking along, they saw the fig tree withered to its roots. 
    21: Peter remembered and said to him, “Rabbi, look! The fig tree that you cursed has withered.” 
    22: Jesus said to them in reply, “Have faith in God. 
    23: Amen, I say to you, whoever says to this mountain, ‘Be lifted up and thrown into the sea,’ and does not doubt in his heart but believes that what he says will happen, it shall be done for him. 
    24: Therefore I tell you, all that you ask for in prayer, believe that you will receive it and it shall be yours. 
    25: When you stand to pray, forgive anyone against whom you have a grievance, so that your heavenly Father may in turn forgive you your transgressions.” 
    26: ][d]
The Authority of Jesus Questioned.[e] 
    27: They returned once more to Jerusalem. As he was walking in the temple area, the chief priests, the scribes, and the elders approached him 
    28: and said to him, “By what authority are you doing these things? Or who gave you this authority to do them?” 
    29: Jesus said to them, “I shall ask you one question. Answer me, and I will tell you by what authority I do these things. 
    30: Was John’s baptism of heavenly or of human origin? Answer me.” 
    31: They discussed this among themselves and said, “If we say, ‘Of heavenly origin,’ he will say, ‘ why did you not believe him?’ 
    32: But shall we say, ‘Of human origin’?”—they feared the crowd, for they all thought John really was a prophet. 
    33: So they said to Jesus in reply, “We do not know.” Then Jesus said to them, “Neither shall I tell you by what authority I do these things.”


  Chapter 12.

    1: 
    2: Parable of the Tenants. 1 He began to speak to them in parables. “A man planted a vineyard, put a hedge around it, dug a wine press, and built a tower. Then he leased it to tenant farmers and left on a journey. 2 At the proper time he sent a servant to the tenants to obtain from them some of the produce of the vineyard. 
    3: But they seized him, beat him, and sent him away empty-handed. 
    4: Again he sent them another servant. And that one they beat over the head and treated shamefully. 
    5: He sent yet another whom they killed. So, too, many others; some they beat, others they killed. 
    6: He had one other to send, a beloved son. He sent him to them last of all, thinking, ‘They will respect my son.’ 
    7: But those tenants said to one another, ‘This is the heir. Come, let us kill him, and the inheritance will be ours.’ 
    8: So they seized him and killed him, and threw him out of the vineyard. 
    9: hat  will the owner of the vineyard do? He will come, put the tenants to death, and give the vineyard to others. 
    10: Have you not read this scripture passage:
‘The stone that the builders rejected
    has become the cornerstone;

    11: 
    12: Parable of the Tenants. 1 He began to speak to them in parables. “A man planted a vineyard, put a hedge around it, dug a wine press, and built a tower. Then he leased it to tenant farmers and left on a journey. 2 At the proper time he sent a servant to the tenants to obtain from them some of the produce of the vineyard. 3 But they seized him, beat him, and sent him away empty-handed. 4 Again he sent them another servant. And that one they beat over the head and treated shamefully. 5 He sent yet another whom they killed. So, too, many others; some they beat, others they killed. 6 He had one other to send, a beloved son. He sent him to them last of all, thinking, ‘They will respect my son.’ 7 But those tenants said to one another, ‘This is the heir. Come, let us kill him, and the inheritance will be ours.’ 8 So they seized him and killed him, and threw him out of the vineyard. 9 What [then] will the owner of the vineyard do? He will come, put the tenants to death, and give the vineyard to others. 10 Have you not read this scripture passage:
‘The stone that the builders rejected
    has become the cornerstone;
11 
by the Lord has this been done,
    and it is wonderful in our eyes’?”
12 They were seeking to arrest him, but they feared the crowd, for they realized that he had addressed the parable to them. So they left him and went away.
Paying Taxes to the Emperor. 
    13: They sent some Pharisees and Herodians to him to ensnare him in his speech.[c] 
    14: They came and said to him, “Teacher, we know that you are a truthful man and that you are not concerned with anyone’s opinion. You do not regard a person’s status but teach the way of God in accordance with the truth. Is it lawful to pay the census tax to Caesar or not? Should we pay or should we not pay?” 
    15: Knowing their hypocrisy he said to them, “Why are you testing me? Bring me a denarius to look at.” 
    16: They brought one to him and he said to them, “Whose image and inscription is this?” They replied to him, “Caesar’s.” 
    17: So Jesus said to them, “Repay to Caesar what belongs to Caesar and to God what belongs to God.” They were utterly amazed at him.
The Question About the Resurrection. 
    18: Some Sadducees, who say there is no resurrection, came to him and put this question to him, 
    19: saying, “Teacher, Moses wrote for us, ‘If someone’s brother dies, leaving a wife but no child, his brother must take the wife and raise up descendants for his brother.’ 
    20: Now there were seven brothers. The first married a woman and died, leaving no descendants. 
    21: So the second married her and died, leaving no descendants, and the third likewise. 
    22: And the seven left no descendants. Last of all the woman also died. 
    23: At the resurrection  whose wife will she be? For all seven had been married to her.” 
    24: Jesus said to them, “Are you not misled because you do not know the scriptures or the power of God? 
    25: When they rise from the dead, they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but they are like the angels in heaven. 
    26: As for the dead being raised, have you not read in the Book of Moses, in the passage about the bush, how God told him, ‘I am the God of Abraham,  God of Isaac, and  God of Jacob’? 
    27: He is not God of the dead but of the living. You are greatly misled.”
The Greatest Commandment. 
    28: One of the scribes, when he came forward and heard them disputing and saw how well he had answered them, asked him, “Which is the first of all the commandments?” 
    29: Jesus replied, “The first is this: ‘Hear, O Israel! The Lord our God is Lord alone! 
    30: You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul, with all your mind, and with all your strength.’ 
    31: The second is this: ‘You shall love your neighbor as yourself.’ There is no other commandment greater than these.” 
    32: The scribe said to him, “Well said, teacher. You are right in saying, ‘He is One and there is no other than he.’ 
    33: And ‘to love him with all your heart, with all your understanding, with all your strength, and to love your neighbor as yourself’ is worth more than all burnt offerings and sacrifices.” 
    34: And when Jesus saw that  answered with understanding, he said to him, “You are not far from the kingdom of God.” And no one dared to ask him any more questions.
The Question About David’s Son.[f] 
    35: As Jesus was teaching in the temple area he said, “How do the scribes claim that the Messiah is the son of David? 
    36: David himself, inspired by the holy Spirit, said:
‘The Lord said to my lord,
“Sit at my right hand
    until I place your enemies under your feet.”’

    37: David himself calls him ‘lord’; so how is he his son?”  great crowd heard this with delight.
Denunciation of the Scribes.[g] 
    38: In the course of his teaching he said, “Beware of the scribes, who like to go around in long robes and accept greetings in the marketplaces, 
    39: seats of honor in synagogues, and places of honor at banquets. 
    40: They devour the houses of widows and, as a pretext, recite lengthy prayers. They will receive a very severe condemnation.”
The Poor Widow’s Contribution. 
    41: He sat down opposite the treasury and observed how the crowd put money into the treasury. Many rich people put in large sums. 
    42: A poor widow also came and put in two small coins worth a few cents. 
    43: Calling his disciples to himself, he said to them, “Amen, I say to you, this poor widow put in more than all the other contributors to the treasury. 
    44: For they have all contributed from their surplus wealth, but she, from her poverty, has contributed all she had, her whole livelihood.”


End of day 292.