Day 283:

Reading Matthew, chapters ['1', '2', '3', '4']:

  Chapter 1.

    1: The Genealogy of Jesus. 1 The book of the genealogy of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham.[b]

    2: Abraham became the father of Isaac, Isaac the father of Jacob, Jacob the father of Judah and his brothers. 
    3: Judah became the father of Perez and Zerah, whose mother was Tamar. Perez became the father of Hezron, Hezron the father of Ram, 
    4: Ram the father of Amminadab. Amminadab became the father of Nahshon, Nahshon the father of Salmon, 
    5: Salmon the father of Boaz, whose mother was Rahab. Boaz became the father of Obed, whose mother was Ruth. Obed became the father of Jesse, 
    6: Jesse the father of David the king.
David became the father of Solomon, whose mother had been the wife of Uriah. 
    7: Solomon became the father of Rehoboam, Rehoboam the father of Abijah, Abijah the father of Asaph. 
    8: Asaph became the father of Jehoshaphat, Jehoshaphat the father of Joram, Joram the father of Uzziah. 
    9: zziah became the father of Jotham, Jotham the father of Ahaz, Ahaz the father of Hezekiah. 
    10: Hezekiah became the father of Manasseh, Manasseh the father of Amos, Amos the father of Josiah. 
    11: Josiah became the father of Jechoniah and his brothers at the time of the Babylonian exile.

    12: After the Babylonian exile, Jechoniah became the father of Shealtiel, Shealtiel the father of Zerubbabel, 
    13: Zerubbabel the father of Abiud. Abiud became the father of Eliakim, Eliakim the father of Azor, 
    14: Azor the father of Zadok. Zadok became the father of Achim, Achim the father of Eliud, 
    15: Eliud the father of Eleazar. Eleazar became the father of Matthan, Matthan the father of Jacob, 
    16: Jacob the father of Joseph, the husband of Mary. Of her was born Jesus who is called the Messiah.

    17: Thus the total number of generations from Abraham to David is fourteen generations; from David to the Babylonian exile, fourteen generations; from the Babylonian exile to the Messiah, fourteen generations.
The Birth of Jesus.[f] 
    18: Now this is how the birth of Jesus Christ came about. When his mother Mary was betrothed to Joseph, but before they lived together, she was found with child through the holy Spirit. 
    19: Joseph her husband, since he was a righteous man, yet unwilling to expose her to shame, decided to divorce her quietly. 
    20: Such was his intention when, behold, the angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream and said, “Joseph, son of David, do not be afraid to take Mary your wife into your home. For it is through the holy Spirit that this child has been conceived in her. 
    21: She will bear a son and you are to name him Jesus, because he will save his people from their sins.” 
    22: All this took place to fulfill what the Lord had said through the prophet:

    23: 
“Behold, the virgin shall be with child and bear a son,
    and they shall name him Emmanuel,”
which means “God is with us.” 
    24: When Joseph awoke, he did as the angel of the Lord had commanded him and took his wife into his home. 
    25: He had no relations with her until she bore a son, and he named him Jesus.


  Chapter 2.

    1: 
    2: The Visit of the Magi. 1 When Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea, in the days of King Herod,[b] behold, magi from the east arrived in Jerusalem, 2 saying, “Where is the newborn king of the Jews? We saw his star[c] at its rising and have come to do him homage.” 
    3: When King Herod heard this, he was greatly troubled, and all Jerusalem with him. 
    4: Assembling all the chief priests and the scribes of the people, he inquired of them where the Messiah was to be born. 
    5: They said to him, “In Bethlehem of Judea, for thus it has been written through the prophet:

    6: 
‘And you, Bethlehem, land of Judah,
    are by no means least among the rulers of Judah;
since from you shall come a ruler,
    who is to shepherd my people Israel.’”

    7: Then Herod called the magi secretly and ascertained from them the time of the star’s appearance. 
    8: He sent them to Bethlehem and said, “Go and search diligently for the child. When you have found him, bring me word, that I too may go and do him homage.” 
    9: fter their audience with the king they set out. And behold, the star that they had seen at its rising preceded them, until it came and stopped over the place where the child was. 
    10: They were overjoyed at seeing the star, 
    11: and on entering the house they saw the child with Mary his mother. They prostrated themselves and did him homage. Then they opened their treasures and offered him gifts of gold, frankincense, and myrrh. 
    12: And having been warned in a dream not to return to Herod, they departed for their country by another way.
The Flight to Egypt. 
    13: When they had departed, behold, the angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream and said, “Rise, take the child and his mother, flee to Egypt,[g] and stay there until I tell you. Herod is going to search for the child to destroy him.” 
    14: Joseph rose and took the child and his mother by night and departed for Egypt. 
    15: He stayed there until the death of Herod, that what the Lord had said through the prophet might be fulfilled, “Out of Egypt I called my son.”
The Massacre of the Infants. 
    16: When Herod realized that he had been deceived by the magi, he became furious. He ordered the massacre of all the boys in Bethlehem and its vicinity two years old and under, in accordance with the time he had ascertained from the magi. 
    17: Then was fulfilled what had been said through Jeremiah the prophet:

    18: 
“A voice was heard in Ramah,
    sobbing and loud lamentation;
Rachel weeping for her children,
    and she would not be consoled,
    since they were no more.”
The Return from Egypt. 
    19: When Herod had died, behold, the angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt 
    20: and said, “Rise, take the child and his mother and go to the land of Israel, for those who sought the child’s life are dead.” 
    21: He rose, took the child and his mother, and went to the land of Israel. 
    22: But when he heard that Archelaus was ruling over Judea in place of his father Herod, he was afraid to go back there. And because he had been warned in a dream, he departed for the region of Galilee. 
    23: He went and dwelt in a town called Nazareth, so that what had been spoken through the prophets might be fulfilled, “He shall be called a Nazorean.”


  Chapter 3.

    1: In those days John the Baptist appeared, preaching in the desert of Judea 
    2: 
    3: The Preaching of John the Baptist. 1 In those days John the Baptist appeared, preaching in the desert of Judea[b] 2 [and] saying, “Repent,[c] for the kingdom of heaven is at hand!” 3 [d]It was of him that the prophet Isaiah had spoken when he said:
“A voice of one crying out in the desert,
‘Prepare the way of the Lord,
    make straight his paths.’”

    4: John wore clothing made of camel’s hair and had a leather belt around his waist. His food was locusts and wild honey. 
    5: At that time Jerusalem, all Judea, and the whole region around the Jordan were going out to him 
    6: and were being baptized by him in the Jordan River as they acknowledged their sins.

    7: When he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming to his baptism, he said to them, “You brood of vipers! Who warned you to flee from the coming wrath? 
    8: Produce good fruit as evidence of your repentance. 
    9: nd do not presume to say to yourselves, ‘We have Abraham as our father.’ For I tell you, God can raise up children to Abraham from these stones. 
    10: Even now the ax lies at the root of the trees. Therefore every tree that does not bear good fruit will be cut down and thrown into the fire. 
    11: I am baptizing you with water, for repentance, but the one who is coming after me is mightier than I. I am not worthy to carry his sandals. He will baptize you with the holy Spirit and fire. 
    12: His winnowing fan is in his hand. He will clear his threshing floor and gather his wheat into his barn, but the chaff he will burn with unquenchable fire.”
The Baptism of Jesus.[j] 
    13: Then Jesus came from Galilee to John at the Jordan to be baptized by him. 
    14: John tried to prevent him, saying, “I need to be baptized by you, and yet you are coming to me?” 
    15: Jesus said to him in reply, “Allow it now, for thus it is fitting for us to fulfill all righteousness.” Then he allowed him. 
    16: After Jesus was baptized, he came up from the water and behold, the heavens were opened [for him], and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove [and] coming upon him. 
    17: And a voice came from the heavens, saying, “This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased.”


  Chapter 4.

    1: Then Jesus was led by the Spirit into the desert to be tempted by the devil. 
    2: He fasted for forty days and forty nights, and afterwards he was hungry. 
    3: 
    4: The Temptation of Jesus. 1 Then Jesus was led by the Spirit into the desert to be tempted by the devil. 2 He fasted for forty days and forty nights,[b] and afterwards he was hungry. 3 The tempter approached and said to him, “If you are the Son of God, command that these stones become loaves of bread.” 4 [c]He said in reply, “It is written:
‘One does not live by bread alone,
    but by every word that comes forth from the mouth of God.’”

    5: Then the devil took him to the holy city, and made him stand on the parapet of the temple, 
    6: and said to him, “If you are the Son of God, throw yourself down. For it is written:
‘He will command his angels concerning you’
    and ‘with their hands they will support you,
lest you dash your foot against a stone.’”

    7: Jesus answered him, “Again it is written, ‘You shall not put the Lord, your God, to the test.’” 
    8: Then the devil took him up to a very high mountain, and showed him all the kingdoms of the world in their magnificence, 
    9: nd he said to him, “All these I shall give to you, if you will prostrate yourself and worship me.” 
    10: At this, Jesus said to him, “Get away, Satan! It is written:
‘The Lord, your God, shall you worship
    and him alone shall you serve.’”

    11: Then the devil left him and, behold, angels came and ministered to him.
The Beginning of the Galilean Ministry. 
    12: When he heard that John had been arrested, he withdrew to Galilee. 
    13: He left Nazareth and went to live in Capernaum by the sea, in the region of Zebulun and Naphtali, 
    14: that what had been said through Isaiah the prophet might be fulfilled:

    15: 
“Land of Zebulun and land of Naphtali,
    the way to the sea, beyond the Jordan,
    Galilee of the Gentiles,

    16: 
the people who sit in darkness
    have seen a great light,
on those dwelling in a land overshadowed by death
    light has arisen.”

    17: From that time on, Jesus began to preach and say, “Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.”
The Call of the First Disciples.[h] 
    18: As he was walking by the Sea of Galilee, he saw two brothers, Simon who is called Peter, and his brother Andrew, casting a net into the sea; they were fishermen. 
    19: He said to them, “Come after me, and I will make you fishers of men.” 
    20: At once they left their nets and followed him. 
    21: He walked along from there and saw two other brothers, James, the son of Zebedee, and his brother John. They were in a boat, with their father Zebedee, mending their nets. He called them, 
    22: and immediately they left their boat and their father and followed him.
Ministering to a Great Multitude. 
    23: He went around all of Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, proclaiming the gospel of the kingdom, and curing every disease and illness among the people. 
    24: His fame spread to all of Syria, and they brought to him all who were sick with various diseases and racked with pain, those who were possessed, lunatics, and paralytics, and he cured them. 
    25: And great crowds from Galilee, the Decapolis, Jerusalem, and Judea, and from beyond the Jordan followed him.


End of day 283.