Day 322:

Reading 2-Corinthians, chapters ['5', '6', '7', '8']:

  Chapter 5.

    1: For we know that if our earthly dwelling, a tent, should be destroyed, we have a building from God, a dwelling not made with hands, eternal in heaven. 
    2: For in this tent we groan, longing to be further clothed with our heavenly habitation 
    3: if indeed, when we have taken it off, we shall not be found naked. 
    4: 
    5: Our Future Destiny. 1 For we know that if our earthly dwelling, a tent, should be destroyed, we have a building from God, a dwelling not made with hands, eternal in heaven. 2 [b]For in this tent we groan, longing to be further clothed with our heavenly habitation 3 if indeed, when we have taken it off,[c] we shall not be found naked. 4 For while we are in this tent we groan and are weighed down, because we do not wish to be unclothed[d] but to be further clothed, so that what is mortal may be swallowed up by life. 5 Now the one who has prepared us for this very thing is God, who has given us the Spirit as a first installment.[e]

    6: So we are always courageous, although we know that while we are at home in the body we are away from the Lord, 
    7: for we walk by faith, not by sight. 
    8: Yet we are courageous, and we would rather leave the body and go home to the Lord. 
    9: herefore, we aspire to please him, whether we are at home or away. 
    10: For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, so that each one may receive recompense, according to what he did in the body, whether good or evil.
The Ministry of Reconciliation. 
    11: Therefore, since we know the fear of the Lord, we try to persuade others; but we are clearly apparent to God, and I hope we are also apparent to your consciousness. 
    12: We are not commending ourselves to you again but giving you an opportunity to boast of us, so that you may have something to say to those who boast of external appearance rather than of the heart. 
    13: For if we are out of our minds, it is for God; if we are rational, it is for you. 
    14: For the love of Christ impels us, once we have come to the conviction that one died for all; therefore, all have died. 
    15: He indeed died for all, so that those who live might no longer live for themselves but for him who for their sake died and was raised.

    16: Consequently, from now on we regard no one according to the flesh; even if we once knew Christ according to the flesh, yet now we know him so no longer. 
    17: So whoever is in Christ is a new creation: the old things have passed away; behold, new things have come. 
    18: And all this is from God, who has reconciled us to himself through Christ and given us the ministry of reconciliation, 
    19: namely, God was reconciling the world to himself in Christ, not counting their trespasses against them and entrusting to us the message of reconciliation. 
    20: So we are ambassadors for Christ, as if God were appealing through us. We implore you on behalf of Christ, be reconciled to God. 
    21: For our sake he made him to be sin who did not know sin, so that we might become the righteousness of God in him.


  Chapter 6.

    1: Working together, then, we appeal to you not to receive the grace of God in vain.[b] 
    2: For he says:
“In an acceptable time I heard you,
    and on the day of salvation I helped you.”
Behold, now is a very acceptable time; behold, now is the day of salvation. 
    3: We cause no one to stumble in anything, in order that no fault may be found with our ministry; 
    4: on the contrary, in everything we commend ourselves as ministers of God, through much endurance,[f] in afflictions, hardships, constraints, 
    5: 
    6: The Experience of the Ministry. 1 Working together, then, we appeal to you not to receive the grace of God in vain.[b] 2 For he says:
“In an acceptable time[c] I heard you,
    and on the day of salvation I helped you.”
Behold, now is a very acceptable time; behold, now is the day of salvation. 3 We cause no one to stumble[d] in anything, in order that no fault may be found with our ministry; 4 [e]on the contrary, in everything we commend ourselves as ministers of God, through much endurance,[f] in afflictions, hardships, constraints, 5 beatings, imprisonments, riots, labors, vigils, fasts; 6 [g]by purity, knowledge, patience, kindness, in a holy spirit, in unfeigned love, 
    7: in truthful speech, in the power of God; with weapons of righteousness at the right and at the left; 
    8: through glory and dishonor, insult and praise. We are treated as deceivers and yet are truthful; 
    9: s unrecognized and yet acknowledged; as dying and behold we live; as chastised and yet not put to death; 
    10: as sorrowful yet always rejoicing; as poor yet enriching many; as having nothing and yet possessing all things.

    11: We have spoken frankly to you, Corinthians; our heart is open wide. 
    12: You are not constrained by us; you are constrained by your own affections. 
    13: As recompense in kind (I speak as to my children), be open yourselves.
Call to Holiness. 
    14: Do not be yoked with those who are different, with unbelievers.[k] For what partnership do righteousness and lawlessness have? Or what fellowship does light have with darkness? 
    15: What accord has Christ with Beliar? Or what has a believer in common with an unbeliever? 
    16: What agreement has the temple of God with idols? For we are the temple of the living God; as God said:
“I will live with them and move among them,
    and I will be their God
    and they shall be my people.

    17: 
Therefore, come forth from them
    and be separate,” says the Lord,
“and touch nothing unclean;
    then I will receive you

    18: 
and I will be a father to you,
    and you shall be sons and daughters to me,
says the Lord Almighty.”


  Chapter 7.

    1: Since we have these promises, beloved, let us cleanse ourselves from every defilement of flesh and spirit, making holiness perfect in the fear of God.

    2: Make room for us; we have not wronged anyone, or ruined anyone, or taken advantage of anyone. 
    3: I do not say this in condemnation, for I have already said that you are in our hearts, that we may die together and live together. 
    4: I have great confidence in you, I have great pride in you; I am filled with encouragement, I am overflowing with joy all the more because of all our affliction.
C. Resolution of the Crisis
Paul’s Joy in Macedonia. 
    5: For even when we came into Macedonia,[d] our flesh had no rest, but we were afflicted in every way—external conflicts, internal fears. 
    6: 
    7: 1 Since we have these promises, beloved, let us cleanse ourselves from every defilement of flesh and spirit, making holiness perfect in the fear of God.
2 Make room for us; we have not wronged anyone, or ruined anyone, or taken advantage of anyone. 3 I do not say this in condemnation, for I have already said that you are in our hearts, that we may die together and live together. 4 I have great confidence in you, I have great pride in you; I am filled with encouragement, I am overflowing with joy all the more because of all our affliction.
C. Resolution of the Crisis[b]
Paul’s Joy in Macedonia. 5 [c]For even when we came into Macedonia,[d] our flesh had no rest, but we were afflicted in every way—external conflicts, internal fears. 6 But God, who encourages the downcast, encouraged us by the arrival of Titus, 7 and not only by his arrival but also by the encouragement with which he was encouraged in regard to you, as he told us of your yearning, your lament, your zeal for me, so that I rejoiced even more. 
    8: For even if I saddened you by my letter, I do not regret it; and if I did regret it ([for] I see that that letter saddened you, if only for a while), 
    9:  rejoice now, not because you were saddened, but because you were saddened into repentance; for you were saddened in a godly way, so that you did not suffer loss in anything because of us. 
    10: For godly sorrow produces a salutary repentance without regret, but worldly sorrow produces death. 
    11: For behold what earnestness this godly sorrow has produced for you, as well as readiness for a defense, and indignation, and fear, and yearning, and zeal, and punishment. In every way you have shown yourselves to be innocent in the matter. 
    12: So then even though I wrote to you, it was not on account of the one who did the wrong, or on account of the one who suffered the wrong, but in order that your concern for us might be made plain to you in the sight of God. 
    13: For this reason we are encouraged.
And besides our encouragement, we rejoice even more because of the joy of Titus, since his spirit has been refreshed by all of you. 
    14: For if I have boasted to him about you, I was not put to shame. No, just as everything we said to you was true, so our boasting before Titus proved to be the truth. 
    15: And his heart goes out to you all the more, as he remembers the obedience of all of you, when you received him with fear and trembling. 
    16: I rejoice, because I have confidence in you in every respect.


  Chapter 8.

    1: We want you to know, brothers,[c] of the grace of God[d] that has been given to the churches of Macedonia, 
    2: for in a severe test of affliction, the abundance of their joy and their profound poverty overflowed in a wealth of generosity on their part. 
    3: For according to their means, I can testify, and beyond their means, spontaneously, 
    4: they begged us insistently for the favor of taking part in the service to the holy ones, 
    5: and this, not as we expected, but they gave themselves first to the Lord and to us through the will of God, 
    6: so that we urged Titus that, as he had already begun, he should also complete for you this gracious act also. 
    7: 
    8: Generosity in Giving. 1 We want you to know, brothers,[c] of the grace of God[d] that has been given to the churches of Macedonia, 2 [e]for in a severe test of affliction, the abundance of their joy and their profound poverty overflowed in a wealth of generosity on their part. 3 [f]For according to their means, I can testify, and beyond their means, spontaneously, 4 they begged us insistently for the favor of taking part in the service to the holy ones, 5 and this, not as we expected, but they gave themselves first to the Lord and to us[g] through the will of God, 6 so that we urged Titus[h] that, as he had already begun, he should also complete for you this gracious act also. 7 [i]Now as you excel in every respect, in faith, discourse, knowledge, all earnestness, and in the love we have for you, may you excel in this gracious act also.
8 I say this not by way of command, but to test the genuineness of your love by your concern for others. 
    9: j]For you know the gracious act of our Lord Jesus Christ, that for your sake he became poor although he was rich, so that by his poverty you might become rich. 
    10: And I am giving counsel in this matter, for it is appropriate for you who began not only to act but to act willingly last year: 
    11: complete it now, so that your eager willingness may be matched by your completion of it out of what you have. 
    12: For if the eagerness is there, it is acceptable according to what one has, not according to what one does not have; 
    13: not that others should have relief while you are burdened, but that as a matter of equality 
    14: your surplus at the present time should supply their needs, so that their surplus may also supply your needs, that there may be equality. 
    15: As it is written:
“Whoever had much did not have more,
    and whoever had little did not have less.”
Titus and His Collaborators. 
    16: But thanks be to God who put the same concern for you into the heart of Titus, 
    17: for he not only welcomed our appeal but, since he is very concerned, he has gone to you of his own accord. 
    18: With him we have sent the brother who is praised in all the churches for his preaching of the gospel. 
    19: And not only that, but he has also been appointed our traveling companion by the churches in this gracious work administered by us for the glory of the Lord  and for the expression of our eagerness. 
    20: This we desire to avoid, that anyone blame us about this lavish gift administered by us, 
    21: for we are concerned for what is honorable not only in the sight of the Lord but also in the sight of others. 
    22: And with them we have sent our brother whom we often tested in many ways and found earnest, but who is now much more earnest because of his great confidence in you. 
    23: As for Titus, he is my partner and co-worker for you; as for our brothers, they are apostles of the churches, the glory of Christ. 
    24: So give proof before the churches of your love and of our boasting about you to them.


End of day 322.