Day 260:

Reading Daniel, chapters ['9', '10', '11', '12']:

  Chapter 9.

    1: It was the first year that Darius, son of Ahasuerus, of the race of the Medes, reigned over the kingdom of the Chaldeans; 
    2: in the first year of his reign, I, Daniel, perceived in the books the number of years the Lord had decreed to the prophet Jeremiah: Jerusalem was to lie in ruins for seventy years.

    3: I turned to the Lord God, to seek help, in prayer and petition, with fasting, sackcloth, and ashes. 
    4: I prayed to the Lord, my God, and confessed, “Ah, Lord, great and awesome God, you who keep your covenant and show mercy toward those who love you and keep your commandments and your precepts! 
    5: We have sinned, been wicked and done evil; we have rebelled and turned from your commandments and your laws. 
    6: We have not obeyed your servants the prophets, who spoke in your name to our kings, our princes, our ancestors, and all the people of the land. 
    7: Justice, O Lord, is on your side; we are shamefaced even to this day: the men of Judah, the residents of Jerusalem, and all Israel, near and far, in all the lands to which you have scattered them because of their treachery toward you. 
    8: 
    9: he Seventy Weeks of Years. 1 It was the first year that Darius, son of Ahasuerus, of the race of the Medes, reigned over the kingdom of the Chaldeans; 2 in the first year of his reign, I, Daniel, perceived in the books the number of years the Lord had decreed to the prophet Jeremiah: Jerusalem was to lie in ruins for seventy years.[b]
3 I turned to the Lord God, to seek help, in prayer and petition, with fasting, sackcloth, and ashes. 4 I prayed to the Lord, my God, and confessed, “Ah, Lord, great and awesome God, you who keep your covenant and show mercy toward those who love you and keep your commandments and your precepts! 5 We have sinned, been wicked and done evil; we have rebelled and turned from your commandments and your laws. 6 We have not obeyed your servants the prophets, who spoke in your name to our kings, our princes, our ancestors, and all the people of the land. 7 Justice, O Lord, is on your side; we are shamefaced even to this day: the men of Judah, the residents of Jerusalem, and all Israel, near and far, in all the lands to which you have scattered them because of their treachery toward you. 8 O Lord, we are ashamed, like our kings, our princes, and our ancestors, for having sinned against you. 9 But to the Lord, our God, belong compassion and forgiveness, though we rebelled against him 
    10: and did not hear the voice of the Lord, our God, by walking in his laws given through his servants the prophets. 
    11: The curse and the oath written in the law of Moses, the servant of God, were poured out over us for our sins, because all Israel transgressed your law and turned aside, refusing to hear your voice. 
    12: He fulfilled the words he spoke against us and against those who ruled us, by bringing upon us an evil—no evil so great has happened under heaven as happened in Jerusalem. 
    13: As it is written in the law of Moses, this evil has come upon us. We did not appease the Lord, our God, by turning back from our wickedness and acting according to your truth, 
    14: so the Lord kept watch over the evil and brought it upon us. The Lord, our God, is just in all that he has done: we did not listen to his voice.

    15: “Now, Lord, our God, who led your people out of the land of Egypt with a strong hand, and made a name for yourself even to this day, we have sinned, we are guilty. 
    16: Lord, in keeping with all your just deeds, let your anger and your wrath be turned away from your city Jerusalem, your holy mountain. On account of our sins and the crimes of our ancestors, Jerusalem and your people have become the reproach of all our neighbors. 
    17: Now, our God, hear the prayer and petition of your servant; and for your own sake, Lord, let your face shine upon your desolate sanctuary. 
    18: Give ear, my God, and listen; open your eyes and look upon our desolate city upon which your name is invoked. When we present our petition before you, we rely not on our just deeds, but on your great mercy. 
    19: Lord, hear! Lord, pardon! Lord, be attentive and act without delay, for your own sake, my God, because your name is invoked upon your city and your people!”

    20: I was still praying to the Lord, my God, confessing my sin and the sin of my people Israel, presenting my petition concerning the holy mountain of my God— 
    21: I was still praying, when the man, Gabriel, whom I had seen in vision before, came to me in flight at the time of the evening offering. 
    22: He instructed me in these words: “Daniel, I have now come to give you understanding. 
    23: When you began your petition, an answer was given which I have come to announce, because you are beloved. Therefore, mark the answer and understand the vision.

    24: 
“Seventy weeks are decreed
    for your people and for your holy city:
Then transgression will stop and sin will end,
    guilt will be expiated,
Everlasting justice will be introduced,
    vision and prophecy ratified,
    and a holy of holies will be anointed.

    25: 
    Know and understand:
From the utterance of the word
    that Jerusalem was to be rebuilt
Until there is an anointed ruler,
    there shall be seven weeks.
In the course of sixty-two weeks
    it shall be rebuilt,
With squares and trenches,
    in time of affliction.

    26: 
After the sixty-two weeks
    an anointed one shall be cut down
    with no one to help him.
And the people of a leader who will come
    shall destroy the city and the sanctuary.
His end shall come in a flood;
    until the end of the war, which is decreed,
    there will be desolation.

    27: 
For one week he shall make
    a firm covenant with the many;
Half the week
    he shall abolish sacrifice and offering;
In their place shall be the desolating abomination
    until the ruin that is decreed
    is poured out upon the desolator.”


  Chapter 10.

    1: 
An Angelic Vision. 1 In the third year of Cyrus, king of Persia, a revelation was given to Daniel, who had been named Belteshazzar. The revelation was certain: a great war;[b] he understood this from the vision. 
    2: In those days, I, Daniel, mourned three full weeks. 
    3: I ate no savory food, took no meat or wine, and did not anoint myself at all until the end of the three weeks.

    4: On the twenty-fourth day of the first month I was on the bank of the great river, the Tigris. 
    5: As I looked up, I saw a man dressed in linen with a belt of fine gold around his waist. 
    6: His body was like chrysolite, his face shone like lightning, his eyes were like fiery torches, his arms and feet looked like burnished bronze, and the sound of his voice was like the roar of a multitude. 
    7: I alone, Daniel, saw the vision; but great fear seized those who were with me; they fled and hid themselves, although they did not see the vision. 
    8: So I was left alone to see this great vision. No strength remained in me; I turned the color of death and was powerless. 
    9: 
    10: An Angelic Vision. 1 In the third year of Cyrus, king of Persia, a revelation was given to Daniel, who had been named Belteshazzar. The revelation was certain: a great war;[b] he understood this from the vision. 2 In those days, I, Daniel, mourned three full weeks. 3 I ate no savory food, took no meat or wine, and did not anoint myself at all until the end of the three weeks.
4 On the twenty-fourth day of the first month[c] I was on the bank of the great river, the Tigris. 5 As I looked up, I saw a man[d] dressed in linen with a belt of fine gold around his waist. 6 His body was like chrysolite, his face shone like lightning, his eyes were like fiery torches, his arms and feet looked like burnished bronze, and the sound of his voice was like the roar of a multitude. 7 I alone, Daniel, saw the vision; but great fear seized those who were with me; they fled and hid themselves, although they did not see the vision. 8 So I was left alone to see this great vision. No strength remained in me; I turned the color of death and was powerless. 9 When I heard the sound of his voice, I fell face forward unconscious.
10 But then a hand touched me, raising me to my hands and knees. 
    11: “Daniel, beloved,” he said to me, “understand the words which I am speaking to you; stand up, for my mission now is to you.” When he said this to me, I stood up trembling. 
    12: “Do not fear, Daniel,” he continued; “from the first day you made up your mind to acquire understanding and humble yourself before God, your prayer was heard. Because of it I started out, 
    13: but the prince of the kingdom of Persia stood in my way for twenty-one days, until finally Michael, one of the chief princes, came to help me. I left him there with the prince of the kingdom of Persia, 
    14: and came to make you understand what shall happen to your people in the last days; for there is yet a vision concerning those days.”

    15: While he was speaking thus to me, I fell forward and kept silent. 
    16: Then something like a hand touched my lips; I opened my mouth and said to the one standing before me, “My lord, I was seized with pangs at the vision and I was powerless. 
    17: How can my lord’s servant speak with you, my lord? For now no strength or even breath is left in me.” 
    18: The one who looked like a man touched me again and strengthened me, saying, 
    19: “Do not fear, beloved. Peace! Take courage and be strong.” When he spoke to me, I grew strong and said, “Speak, my lord, for you have strengthened me.” 
    20: “Do you know,” he asked, “why I have come to you? Soon I must fight the prince of Persia again. When I leave, the prince of Greece will come; 
    21: but I shall tell you what is written in the book of truth. No one supports me against these except Michael, your prince, 1 and in the first year of Darius the Mede I stood to strengthen him and be his refuge.


  Chapter 11.

    1: 
The Hellenistic Age. 
    2: “Now I shall tell you the truth.
“Three kings of Persia are yet to appear; and a fourth shall acquire the greatest riches of all. Strengthened by his riches, he shall stir up all kingdoms, even that of Greece. 
    3: But a powerful king shall appear and rule with great might, doing as he wills. 
    4: No sooner shall he appear than his kingdom shall be broken and divided in four directions under heaven; but not among his descendants or in keeping with his mighty rule, for his kingdom shall be torn to pieces and belong to others.

    5: “The king of the south shall grow strong, but one of his princes shall grow stronger still and govern a domain greater than his. 
    6: After some years they shall become allies: the daughter of the king of the south shall come to the king of the north to carry out the alliance. But she shall not retain power: and his offspring shall not survive, and she shall be given up, together with those who brought her, her son, and her supporter in due time. 
    7: A descendant of her line shall succeed to his place, and shall come against the army, enter the stronghold of the king of the north, attack and conquer them. 
    8: Even their gods, with their molten images and their precious vessels of silver and gold, he shall carry away as spoils of war into Egypt. For years he shall have nothing to do with the king of the north. 
    9: hen the latter shall invade the land of the king of the south, and return to his own country.

    10: 
    11: The Hellenistic Age. 2 “Now I shall tell you the truth.
“Three kings of Persia are yet to appear; and a fourth shall acquire the greatest riches of all. Strengthened by his riches, he shall stir up all kingdoms, even that of Greece. 3 But a powerful king[b] shall appear and rule with great might, doing as he wills. 4 No sooner shall he appear than his kingdom shall be broken and divided in four directions under heaven; but not among his descendants or in keeping with his mighty rule, for his kingdom shall be torn to pieces and belong to others.
5 [c]“The king of the south shall grow strong, but one of his princes shall grow stronger still and govern a domain greater than his. 6 [d]After some years they shall become allies: the daughter of the king of the south shall come to the king of the north to carry out the alliance. But she shall not retain power: and his offspring shall not survive, and she shall be given up, together with those who brought her, her son, and her supporter in due time. 7 A descendant of her line shall succeed to his place, and shall come against the army, enter the stronghold of the king of the north, attack and conquer them. 8 Even their gods, with their molten images and their precious vessels of silver and gold, he shall carry away as spoils of war into Egypt. For years he shall have nothing to do with the king of the north. 9 Then the latter shall invade the land of the king of the south, and return to his own country.
10 “But his sons shall be aroused and assemble a great armed host, which shall pass through like a flood and again surge around the stronghold. 11 [e]The king of the south, enraged, shall go out to fight against the king of the north, who shall field a great host, but the host shall be given into his hand. 
    12: When the host is carried off, in the pride of his heart he shall bring down tens of thousands, but he shall not triumph. 
    13: For the king of the north shall raise another army, greater than before; after some years he shall attack with this large army and great resources. 
    14: In those times many shall resist the king of the south, and violent ones among your people shall rise up in fulfillment of vision, but they shall stumble. 
    15: When the king of the north comes, he shall set up siegeworks and take the fortified city by storm. The forces of the south shall not withstand him, and not even his picked troops shall have the strength to withstand. 
    16: The invader shall do as he wills, with no one to withstand him. He shall stop in the glorious land, and it shall all be in his power. 
    17: He shall resolve to come with the entire strength of his kingdom. He shall make an alliance with him and give him a daughter in marriage in order to destroy him, but this shall not stand. 
    18: He shall turn to the coastland and take many prisoners, but a commander shall put an end to his shameful conduct, so that he cannot retaliate. 
    19: He shall turn to the strongholds of his own land, but shall stumble and fall, to be found no more. 
    20: In his stead one shall arise who will send a collector of tribute through the glorious kingdom, but he shall soon be destroyed, though not in conflict or in battle.

    21: “There shall arise in his place a despicable person, to whom the royal insignia shall not be given. He shall enter by stealth and seize the kingdom by fraud. 
    22: Armed forces shall be completely overwhelmed by him and crushed, even the prince of the covenant. 
    23: After making alliances, he shall treacherously rise to power with only a few supporters. 
    24: By stealth he shall enter prosperous provinces and do that which his fathers or grandfathers never did; he shall distribute spoil, plunder, and riches among them and devise plots against their strongholds. 
    25: He shall rouse his strength and courage to meet the king of the south with a great army; the king of the south shall go into battle with a very large and strong army, but he shall not stand because of the plots devised against him. 
    26: Even his table companions shall seek to destroy him, his army shall be overwhelmed, and many shall be struck down. 
    27: The two kings, resolved on evil, shall sit at table together and exchange lies, but they shall have no success, because the appointed end is not yet.

    28: “He shall turn back toward his land with great riches, his mind set against the holy covenant; he shall take action and return to his land. 
    29: At the time appointed he shall come again to the south, but this time it shall not be as before. 
    30: When ships of the Kittim confront him, he shall lose heart and retreat. Then he shall rage against the holy covenant and take action; he shall again favor those who forsake the holy covenant. 
    31: Armed forces shall rise at his command and defile the sanctuary stronghold, abolishing the daily sacrifice and setting up the desolating abomination. 
    32: By his deceit he shall make some who were disloyal forsake the covenant; but those who remain loyal to their God shall take strong action. 
    33: Those with insight among the people shall instruct the many; though for a time the sword, flames, exile, and plunder will cause them to stumble. 
    34: When they stumble, they will be helped, but only a little; many shall join them, but out of treachery. 
    35: Some of those with insight shall stumble so that they may be tested, refined, and purified, until the end time which is still appointed to come.

    36: “The king shall do as he wills, exalting himself and making himself greater than any god; he shall utter dreadful blasphemies against the God of gods. He shall prosper only till the wrath is finished, for what is determined must take place. 
    37: He shall have no regard for the gods of his ancestors or for the one in whom women delight; for no god shall he have regard, because he shall make himself greater than all. 
    38: Instead, he shall give glory to the god of strongholds; a god unknown to his ancestors he shall glorify with gold, silver, precious stones, and other treasures. 
    39: He shall act for those who fortify strongholds, a people of a foreign god, whom he has recognized. He shall greatly honor them; he shall make them rule over the many and distribute the land as a reward.

    40: “At the end time the king of the south shall engage him in battle but the king of the north shall overwhelm him with chariots and horsemen and a great fleet, passing through the lands like a flood. 
    41: He shall enter the glorious land and many shall fall, except Edom, Moab, and the chief part of Ammon, which shall escape his power. 
    42: He shall extend his power over the land, and not even Egypt shall escape. 
    43: He shall control the riches of gold and silver and all the treasures of Egypt; Libya and Ethiopia shall be in his entourage. 
    44: When reports from the east and the north disturb him, he shall set out with great fury to destroy many, putting them under the ban. 
    45: He shall pitch the tents of his royal pavilion between the sea and the glorious holy mountain, but he shall come to his end with none to help him.


  Chapter 12.

    1: 
    2: The Resurrection
1 
“At that time there shall arise Michael,
    the great prince,
    guardian of your people;
It shall be a time unsurpassed in distress
    since the nation began until that time.
At that time your people shall escape,
    everyone who is found written in the book.
2 
Many of those who sleep[b]
    in the dust of the earth shall awake;
Some to everlasting life,
    others to reproach and everlasting disgrace.

    3: 
But those with insight shall shine brightly
    like the splendor of the firmament,
And those who lead the many to justice
    shall be like the stars forever.

    4: “As for you, Daniel, keep secret the message and seal the book until the end time; many shall wander aimlessly and evil shall increase.”

    5: I, Daniel, looked and saw two others, one standing on either bank of the river. 
    6: One of them said to the man clothed in linen, who was upstream, “How long shall it be to the end of these appalling things?” 
    7: The man clothed in linen, who was upstream, lifted his hands to heaven; and I heard him swear by him who lives forever that it should be for a time, two times, and half a time; and that, when the power of the destroyer of the holy people was brought to an end, all these things should end. 
    8: I heard, but I did not understand; so I asked, “My lord, what follows this?” 
    9: Go, Daniel,” he said, “because the words are to be kept secret and sealed until the end time. 
    10: Many shall be refined, purified, and tested, but the wicked shall prove wicked; the wicked shall have no understanding, but those with insight shall. 
    11: 
    12: The Resurrection
1 
“At that time there shall arise Michael,
    the great prince,
    guardian of your people;
It shall be a time unsurpassed in distress
    since the nation began until that time.
At that time your people shall escape,
    everyone who is found written in the book.
2 
Many of those who sleep[b]
    in the dust of the earth shall awake;
Some to everlasting life,
    others to reproach and everlasting disgrace.
3 
But those with insight shall shine brightly
    like the splendor of the firmament,
And those who lead the many to justice
    shall be like the stars[c] forever.
4 “As for you, Daniel, keep secret the message and seal the book until the end time; many shall wander aimlessly and evil shall increase.”
5 I, Daniel, looked and saw two others, one standing on either bank of the river. 6 One of them said to the man clothed in linen, who was upstream, “How long shall it be to the end of these appalling things?” 7 The man clothed in linen, who was upstream, lifted his hands to heaven; and I heard him swear by him who lives forever that it should be for a time, two times, and half a time;[d] and that, when the power of the destroyer of the holy people was brought to an end, all these things should end. 8 I heard, but I did not understand; so I asked, “My lord, what follows this?” 9 “Go, Daniel,” he said, “because the words are to be kept secret and sealed until the end time. 10 Many shall be refined, purified, and tested, but the wicked shall prove wicked; the wicked shall have no understanding, but those with insight shall. 11 [e]From the time that the daily sacrifice is abolished and the desolating abomination is set up, there shall be one thousand two hundred and ninety days. 12 Blessed are they who have patience and persevere for the one thousand three hundred and thirty-five days. 
    13: Go, take your rest, you shall rise for your reward at the end of days.”


End of day 260.