Day 244:

Reading Baruch, chapters ['1', '2', '3', '4']:

  Chapter 1.

    1: A. Historical Setting
1 Now these are the words of the scroll which Baruch, son of Neriah, son of Mahseiah, son of Zedekiah, son of Hasadiah, son of Hilkiah, wrote in Babylon, 
    2: in the fifth year, on the seventh day of the month, at the time the Chaldeans took Jerusalem and destroyed it with fire. 
    3: Baruch read the words of this scroll in the hearing of Jeconiah, son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, and all the people who came to the reading: 
    4: the nobles, kings’ sons, elders, and all the people, small and great—all who lived in Babylon by the river Sud.

    5: They wept, fasted, and prayed before the Lord, 
    6: and collected such funds as each could afford. 
    7: These they sent to Jerusalem, to Jehoiakim the priest, son of Hilkiah, son of Shallum, and to the priests and the whole people who were with him in Jerusalem. 
    8: (At the same time he received the vessels of the house of the Lord that had been removed from the temple, to restore them to the land of Judah, on the tenth of Sivan. These silver vessels Zedekiah, son of Josiah, king of Judah, had had made 
    9: fter Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, carried off as captives Jeconiah and the princes, the skilled workers, the nobles, and the people of the land from Jerusalem, and brought them to Babylon.)
B. Confession of Guilt

    10: The message was: “We send you funds, with which you are to procure burnt offerings, sin offerings, and frankincense, and to prepare grain offerings; offer these on the altar of the Lord our God, 
    11: and pray for the life of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, and of Belshazzar, his son, that their lifetimes may be as the days of the heavens above the earth. 
    12: Pray that the Lord may give us strength, and light to our eyes, that we may live under the protective shadow of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, and of Belshazzar, his son, to serve them many days, and find favor in their sight. 
    13: Pray for us to the Lord, our God, for we have sinned against the Lord, our God. Even to this day the wrath of the Lord and his anger have not turned away from us. 
    14: On the feast day and during the days of assembly, read aloud in the house of the Lord this scroll that we send you:

    15: “To the Lord our God belongs justice; to us, people of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem, to be shamefaced, as on this day— 
    16: to us, our kings, rulers, priests, and prophets, and our ancestors. 
    17: We have sinned in the Lord’s sight 
    18: and disobeyed him. We have not listened to the voice of the Lord, our God, so as to follow the precepts the Lord set before us. 
    19: From the day the Lord led our ancestors out of the land of Egypt until the present day, we have been disobedient to the Lord, our God, and neglected to listen to his voice. 
    20: Even today evils cling to us, the curse the Lord pronounced to Moses, his servant, at the time he led our ancestors out of the land of Egypt to give us a land flowing with milk and honey. 
    21: For we did not listen to the voice of the Lord, our God, in all the words of the prophets he sent us, 
    22: but each of us has followed the inclinations of our wicked hearts, served other gods, and done evil in the sight of the Lord, our God.


  Chapter 2.

    1: 
    2: 1 “So the Lord carried out the warning he had uttered against us: against our judges, who governed Israel, against our kings and princes, and against the people of Israel and Judah. 2 Nowhere under heaven has anything been done like what he did in Jerusalem, as was written in the law of Moses: 
    3: that we would each eat the flesh of our sons, each the flesh of our daughters. 
    4: He has made us subject to all the kingdoms around us, an object of reproach and horror among all the peoples around us, where the Lord has scattered us. 
    5: We are brought low, not raised high, because we sinned against the Lord, our God, not listening to his voice.

    6: “To the Lord, our God, belongs justice; to us and to our ancestors, to be shamefaced, as on this day. 
    7: All the evils of which the Lord had warned us have come upon us. 
    8: We did not entreat the favor of the Lord by turning, each one, from the designs of our evil hearts. 
    9: he Lord kept watch over the evils, and brought them home to us; for the Lord is just in all the works he commanded us to do, 
    10: but we did not listen to his voice, or follow the precepts of the Lord which he had set before us.
C. Prayer for Deliverance

    11: “And now, Lord, God of Israel, who led your people out of the land of Egypt with a strong hand, with signs and wonders and great might, and with an upraised arm, so that you have made for yourself a name to the present day: 
    12: we have sinned, we have committed sacrilege, we have violated all your statutes, Lord, our God. 
    13: Withdraw your anger from us, for we are left few in number among the nations where you have scattered us. 
    14: Hear, Lord, our prayer of supplication, and deliver us for your own sake: grant us favor in the sight of those who brought us into exile, 
    15: that the whole earth may know that you are the Lord, our God, and that Israel and his descendants bear your name. 
    16: Lord, look down from your holy dwelling and take thought of us; Lord, incline your ear to hear us. 
    17: Open your eyes and see: it is not the dead in Hades, whose breath has been taken from within them, who will declare the glory and vindication to the Lord. 
    18: The person who is deeply grieved, who walks bowed and feeble, with failing eyes and famished soul, will declare your glory and justice, Lord!

    19: “Not on the just deeds of our ancestors and our kings do we base our plea for mercy in your sight, Lord, our God. 
    20: You have sent your wrath and anger upon us, as you had warned us through your servants the prophets: 
    21: Thus says the Lord: Bend your necks and serve the king of Babylon, that you may continue in the land I gave your ancestors; 
    22: for if you do not listen to the Lord’s voice so as to serve the king of Babylon, 
    23: I will silence from the cities of Judah and from the streets of Jerusalem the cry of joy and the cry of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride; and all the land shall be deserted, without inhabitants. 
    24: But we did not listen to your voice, or serve the king of Babylon, and you carried out the threats you had made through your servants the prophets, that the bones of our kings and the bones of our ancestors would be brought out from their burial places. 
    25: And indeed, they lie exposed to the heat of day and the frost of night. They died in great suffering, by famine and sword and plague. 
    26: And you reduced the house which bears your name to what it is today, because of the wickedness of the house of Israel and the house of Judah.
God’s Promises Recalled. 
    27: “But with us, Lord, our God, you have dealt in all your clemency and in all your great mercy. 
    28: Thus you spoke through your servant Moses, the day you ordered him to write down your law in the presence of the Israelites: 
    29: ‘If you do not listen to my voice, surely this great and numerous throng will dwindle away among the nations to which I will scatter them. 
    30: For I know they will not listen to me, because they are a stiff-necked people. But in the land of their exile they shall have a change of heart; 
    31: they shall know that I, the Lord, am their God. I will give them a heart and ears that listen; 
    32: and they shall praise me in the land of their exile, and shall remember my name. 
    33: Then they shall turn back from their stiff-necked stubbornness, and from their evil deeds, because they shall remember the ways of their ancestors, who sinned against the Lord. 
    34: And I will bring them back to the land I promised on oath to their ancestors, to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; and they shall rule it. I will make them increase; they shall not be few. 
    35: And I will establish for them an eternal covenant: I will be their God, and they shall be my people; and I will never again remove my people Israel from the land I gave them.’


  Chapter 3.

    1: “Lord Almighty, God of Israel, the anguished soul, the dismayed spirit cries out to you. 
    2: 
    3: 1 “Lord Almighty, God of Israel, the anguished soul, the dismayed spirit cries out to you. 2 Hear, Lord, and have mercy, for you are a merciful God; have mercy on us, who have sinned against you: 3 for you are enthroned forever, while we are perishing forever. 
    4: Lord Almighty, God of Israel, hear the prayer of the dead of Israel, children who sinned against you; they did not listen to the voice of the Lord, their God, and their evils cling to us. 
    5: Do not remember the wicked deeds of our ancestors, but remember at this time your power and your name, 
    6: for you are the Lord our God; and you, Lord, we will praise! 
    7: This is why you put into our hearts the fear of you: that we may call upon your name, and praise you in our exile, when we have removed from our hearts all the wickedness of our ancestors who sinned against you. 
    8: See, today we are in exile, where you have scattered us, an object of reproach and cursing and punishment for all the wicked deeds of our ancestors, who withdrew from the Lord, our God.”
II. Praise of Wisdom
A. Importance of Wisdom

    9: Hear, Israel, the commandments of life:
    listen, and know prudence!

    10: 
How is it, Israel,
    that you are in the land of your foes,
    grown old in a foreign land,

    11: 
Defiled with the dead,
    counted among those destined for Hades?

    12: 
You have forsaken the fountain of wisdom!

    13: 
    Had you walked in the way of God,
    you would have dwelt in enduring peace.

    14: 
Learn where prudence is,
    where strength, where understanding;
That you may know also
    where are length of days, and life,
    where light of the eyes, and peace.

    15: 
Who has found the place of wisdom?
    Who has entered into her treasuries?

    16: 
Where are the rulers of the nations,
    who lorded it over the wild beasts of the earth,

    17: 
    made sport of the birds in the heavens,
Who heaped up the silver,
    the gold in which people trust,
    whose possessions were unlimited,

    18: 
Who schemed anxiously for money,
    their doings beyond discovery?

    19: 
They have vanished, gone down to Hades,
    and others have risen up in their stead.

    20: 
Later generations have seen the light of day,
    have dwelt on the earth,
But the way to understanding they have not known,

    21: 
    they have not perceived her paths or reached her;
    their children remain far from the way to her.

    22: 
She has not been heard of in Canaan,
    nor seen in Teman.

    23: 
The descendants of Hagar who seek knowledge on earth,
    the merchants of Medan and Tema,
    the storytellers and those seeking knowledge—
These have not known the way to wisdom,
    nor have they kept her paths in mind.
B. Inaccessibility of Wisdom

    24: 
O Israel, how vast is the dwelling of God,
    how broad the scope of his dominion:

    25: 
Vast and endless,
    high and immeasurable!

    26: 
In it were born the giants,
    renowned at the first,
    huge in stature, skilled in war.

    27: 
These God did not choose,
    nor did he give them the way of understanding;

    28: 
They perished for lack of prudence,
    perished through their own folly.

    29: 
Who has gone up to the heavens and taken her,
    bringing her down from the clouds?

    30: 
Who has crossed the sea and found her,
    bearing her away rather than choice gold?

    31: 
None knows the way to her,
    nor has at heart her path.

    32: 
But the one who knows all things knows her;
    he has probed her by his knowledge—
The one who established the earth for all time,
    and filled it with four-footed animals,

    33: 
Who sends out the lightning, and it goes,
    calls it, and trembling it obeys him;

    34: 
Before whom the stars at their posts
    shine and rejoice.

    35: 
When he calls them, they answer, “Here we are!”
    shining with joy for their Maker.

    36: 
Such is our God;
    no other is to be compared to him:
C. Wisdom Contained in the Law

    37: 
He has uncovered the whole way of understanding,
    and has given her to Jacob, his servant,
    to Israel, his beloved.

    38: 
Thus she has appeared on earth,
    is at home with mortals.


  Chapter 4.

    1: 
She is the book of the precepts of God,
    the law that endures forever;
All who cling to her will live,
    but those will die who forsake her.

    2: 
Turn, O Jacob, and receive her:
    walk by her light toward splendor.

    3: 
    4: 1 
She is the book of the precepts of God,
    the law that endures forever;
All who cling to her will live,
    but those will die who forsake her.
2 
Turn, O Jacob, and receive her:
    walk by her light toward splendor.
3 
Do not give your glory to another,
    your privileges to an alien nation.
4 
Blessed are we, O Israel;
    for what pleases God is known to us!
III. Baruch’s Poem of Consolation[b]
A. Baruch Addresses Diaspora

    5: 
Take courage, my people!
    Remember, O Israel,

    6: 
You were sold to the nations
    not for destruction;
It was because you angered God
    that you were handed over to your foes.

    7: 
For you provoked your Maker
    with sacrifices to demons and not to God;

    8: 
You forgot the eternal God who nourished you,
    and you grieved Jerusalem who nurtured you.

    9: She indeed saw coming upon you
    the wrath of God; and she said:
B. Jerusalem Addresses Neighbors
“Hear, you neighbors of Zion!
    God has brought great mourning upon me,

    10: 
For I have seen the captivity
    that the Eternal One has brought
    upon my sons and daughters.

    11: 
With joy I nurtured them;
    but with mourning and lament I sent them away.

    12: 
Let no one gloat over me,
    a widow, bereft of many;
For the sins of my children I am left desolate,
    because they turned from the law of God,

    13: 
    and did not acknowledge his statutes;
In the ways of God’s commandments they did not walk,
    nor did they tread the disciplined paths of his justice.

    14: 
“Let Zion’s neighbors come—
    Remember the captivity of my sons and daughters,
    brought upon them by the Eternal One.

    15: 
He has brought against them a nation from afar,
    a nation ruthless and of alien speech,
That has neither reverence for old age
    nor pity for the child;

    16: 
They have led away this widow’s beloved sons,
    have left me solitary, without daughters.
C. Jerusalem Addresses Diaspora

    17: 
What can I do to help you?

    18: 
    The one who has brought this evil upon you
    must himself deliver you from your enemies’ hands.

    19: 
Farewell, my children, farewell;
    I am left desolate.

    20: 
I have taken off the garment of peace,
    have put on sackcloth for my prayer of supplication;
    while I live I will cry out to the Eternal One.

    21: 
“Take courage, my children; call upon God;
    he will deliver you from oppression, from enemy hands.

    22: 
I have put my hope for your deliverance in the Eternal One,
    and joy has come to me from the Holy One
Because of the mercy that will swiftly reach you
    from your eternal Savior.

    23: 
With mourning and lament I sent you away,
    but God will give you back to me
    with gladness and joy forever.

    24: 
As Zion’s neighbors lately saw you taken captive,
    so shall they soon see God’s salvation come to you,
    with great glory and the splendor of the Eternal One.

    25: 
“My children, bear patiently the wrath
    that has come upon you from God;
Your enemies have persecuted you,
    but you will soon see their destruction
    and trample upon their necks.

    26: 
My pampered children have trodden rough roads,
    carried off by their enemies like sheep in a raid.

    27: 
Take courage, my children; call out to God!
    The one who brought this upon you will remember you.

    28: 
As your hearts have been disposed to stray from God,
    so turn now ten times the more to seek him;

    29: 
For the one who has brought disaster upon you
    will, in saving you, bring you eternal joy.”
D. Baruch Addresses Jerusalem

    30: 
Take courage, Jerusalem!
    The one who gave you your name will console you.

    31: 
Wretched shall be those who harmed you,
    who rejoiced at your downfall;

    32: 
Wretched shall be the cities where your children were enslaved,
    wretched the city that received your children.

    33: 
As that city rejoiced at your collapse,
    and made merry at your downfall,
    so shall she grieve over her own desolation.

    34: 
I will take from her the rejoicing crowds,
    and her exultation shall be turned to mourning:

    35: 
For fire shall come upon her
    from the Eternal One, for many a day,
    to be inhabited by demons for a long time.

    36: 
Look to the east, Jerusalem;
    see the joy that comes to you from God!

    37: 
Here come your children whom you sent away,
    gathered in from east to west
By the word of the Holy One,
    rejoicing in the glory of God.


End of day 244.