Day 308:

Reading Acts, chapters ['9', '10', '11', '12']:

  Chapter 9.

    1: Now Saul, still breathing murderous threats against the disciples of the Lord, went to the high priest 
    2: and asked him for letters to the synagogues in Damascus, that, if he should find any men or women who belonged to the Way, he might bring them back to Jerusalem in chains. 
    3: On his journey, as he was nearing Damascus, a light from the sky suddenly flashed around him. 
    4: He fell to the ground and heard a voice saying to him, “Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?” 
    5: He said, “Who are you, sir?” The reply came, “I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting. 
    6: Now get up and go into the city and you will be told what you must do.” 
    7: The men who were traveling with him stood speechless, for they heard the voice but could see no one. 
    8: 
    9: aul’s Conversion. 1 Now Saul, still breathing murderous threats against the disciples of the Lord, went to the high priest 2 and asked him for letters to the synagogues in Damascus, that, if he should find any men or women who belonged to the Way,[b] he might bring them back to Jerusalem in chains. 3 On his journey, as he was nearing Damascus, a light from the sky suddenly flashed around him. 4 He fell to the ground and heard a voice saying to him, “Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?” 5 He said, “Who are you, sir?” The reply came, “I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting. 6 Now get up and go into the city and you will be told what you must do.” 7 The men who were traveling with him stood speechless, for they heard the voice but could see no one. 8 Saul got up from the ground, but when he opened his eyes he could see nothing;[c] so they led him by the hand and brought him to Damascus. 9 For three days he was unable to see, and he neither ate nor drank.
Saul’s Baptism. 
    10: There was a disciple in Damascus named Ananias, and the Lord said to him in a vision, “Ananias.” He answered, “Here I am, Lord.” 
    11: The Lord said to him, “Get up and go to the street called Straight and ask at the house of Judas for a man from Tarsus named Saul. He is there praying, 
    12: and  he has seen a man named Ananias come in and lay [his] hands on him, that he may regain his sight.” 
    13: But Ananias replied, “Lord, I have heard from many sources about this man, what evil things he has done to your holy ones in Jerusalem. 
    14: And here he has authority from the chief priests to imprison all who call upon your name.” 
    15: But the Lord said to him, “Go, for this man is a chosen instrument of mine to carry my name before Gentiles, kings, and Israelites, 
    16: and I will show him what he will have to suffer for my name.” 
    17: So Ananias went and entered the house; laying his hands on him, he said, “Saul, my brother, the Lord has sent me, Jesus who appeared to you on the way by which you came, that you may regain your sight and be filled with the holy Spirit.” 
    18: Immediately things like scales fell from his eyes and he regained his sight. He got up and was baptized, 
    19: and when he had eaten, he recovered his strength.
Saul Preaches in Damascus. He stayed some days with the disciples in Damascus, 
    20: and he began at once to proclaim Jesus in the synagogues, that he is the Son of God. 
    21: All who heard him were astounded and said, “Is not this the man who in Jerusalem ravaged those who call upon this name, and came here expressly to take them back in chains to the chief priests?” 
    22: But Saul grew all the stronger and confounded  Jews who lived in Damascus, proving that this is the Messiah.
Saul Visits Jerusalem. 
    23: After a long time had passed, the Jews conspired to kill him, 
    24: but their plot became known to Saul. Now they were keeping watch on the gates day and night so as to kill him, 
    25: but his disciples took him one night and let him down through an opening in the wall, lowering him in a basket.

    26: When he arrived in Jerusalem he tried to join the disciples, but they were all afraid of him, not believing that he was a disciple. 
    27: Then Barnabas took charge of him and brought him to the apostles, and he reported to them how on the way he had seen the Lord and that he had spoken to him, and how in Damascus he had spoken out boldly in the name of Jesus. 
    28: He moved about freely with them in Jerusalem, and spoke out boldly in the name of the Lord. 
    29: He also spoke and debated with the Hellenists, but they tried to kill him. 
    30: And when the brothers learned of this, they took him down to Caesarea and sent him on his way to Tarsus.
The Church at Peace. 
    31: The church throughout all Judea, Galilee, and Samaria was at peace. It was being built up and walked in the fear of the Lord, and with the consolation of the holy Spirit it grew in numbers.
Peter Heals Aeneas at Lydda. 
    32: As Peter was passing through every region, he went down to the holy ones living in Lydda. 
    33: There he found a man named Aeneas, who had been confined to bed for eight years, for he was paralyzed. 
    34: Peter said to him, “Aeneas, Jesus Christ heals you. Get up and make your bed.” He got up at once. 
    35: And all the inhabitants of Lydda and Sharon saw him, and they turned to the Lord.
Peter Restores Tabitha to Life. 
    36: Now in Joppa there was a disciple named Tabitha (which translated means Dorcas). She was completely occupied with good deeds and almsgiving. 
    37: Now during those days she fell sick and died, so after washing her, they laid  out in a room upstairs. 
    38: Since Lydda was near Joppa, the disciples, hearing that Peter was there, sent two men to him with the request, “Please come to us without delay.” 
    39: So Peter got up and went with them. When he arrived, they took him to the room upstairs where all the widows came to him weeping and showing him the tunics and cloaks that Dorcas had made while she was with them. 
    40: Peter sent them all out and knelt down and prayed. Then he turned to her body and said, “Tabitha, rise up.” She opened her eyes, saw Peter, and sat up. 
    41: He gave her his hand and raised her up, and when he had called the holy ones and the widows, he presented her alive. 
    42: This became known all over Joppa, and many came to believe in the Lord. 
    43: And he stayed a long time in Joppa with Simon, a tanner.


  Chapter 10.

    1: 
The Vision of Cornelius. 1 Now in Caesarea there was a man named Cornelius, a centurion of the Cohort called the Italica,[b] 
    2: devout and God-fearing along with his whole household, who used to give alms generously to the Jewish people and pray to God constantly. 
    3: One afternoon about three o’clock, he saw plainly in a vision an angel of God come in to him and say to him, “Cornelius.” 
    4: He looked intently at him and, seized with fear, said, “What is it, sir?” He said to him, “Your prayers and almsgiving have ascended as a memorial offering before God. 
    5: Now send some men to Joppa and summon one Simon who is called Peter. 
    6: He is staying with another Simon, a tanner, who has a house by the sea.” 
    7: When the angel who spoke to him had left, he called two of his servants and a devout soldier from his staff, 
    8: explained everything to them, and sent them to Joppa.
The Vision of Peter. 
    9: 
    10: The Vision of Cornelius. 1 Now in Caesarea there was a man named Cornelius, a centurion of the Cohort called the Italica,[b] 2 devout and God-fearing along with his whole household, who used to give alms generously[c] to the Jewish people and pray to God constantly. 3 One afternoon about three o’clock,[d] he saw plainly in a vision an angel of God come in to him and say to him, “Cornelius.” 4 He looked intently at him and, seized with fear, said, “What is it, sir?” He said to him, “Your prayers and almsgiving have ascended as a memorial offering before God. 5 Now send some men to Joppa and summon one Simon who is called Peter. 6 He is staying with another Simon, a tanner, who has a house by the sea.” 7 When the angel who spoke to him had left, he called two of his servants and a devout soldier[e] from his staff, 8 explained everything to them, and sent them to Joppa.
The Vision of Peter. 9 [f]The next day, while they were on their way and nearing the city, Peter went up to the roof terrace to pray at about noontime.[g] 10 He was hungry and wished to eat, and while they were making preparations he fell into a trance. 
    11: He saw heaven opened and something resembling a large sheet coming down, lowered to the ground by its four corners. 
    12: In it were all the earth’s four-legged animals and reptiles and the birds of the sky. 
    13: A voice said to him, “Get up, Peter. Slaughter and eat.” 
    14: But Peter said, “Certainly not, sir. For never have I eaten anything profane and unclean.” 
    15: The voice spoke to him again, a second time, “What God has made clean, you are not to call profane.” 
    16: This happened three times, and then the object was taken up into the sky.

    17: While Peter was in doubt about the meaning of the vision he had seen, the men sent by Cornelius asked for Simon’s house and arrived at the entrance. 
    18: They called out inquiring whether Simon, who is called Peter, was staying there. 
    19: As Peter was pondering the vision, the Spirit said , “There are three men here looking for you. 
    20: So get up, go downstairs, and accompany them without hesitation, because I have sent them.” 
    21: Then Peter went down to the men and said, “I am the one you are looking for. What is the reason for your being here?” 
    22: They answered, “Cornelius, a centurion, an upright and God-fearing man, respected by the whole Jewish nation, was directed by a holy angel to summon you to his house and to hear what you have to say.” 
    23: So he invited them in and showed them hospitality.
The next day he got up and went with them, and some of the brothers from Joppa went with him. 
    24: On the following day he entered Caesarea. Cornelius was expecting them and had called together his relatives and close friends. 
    25: When Peter entered, Cornelius met him and, falling at his feet, paid him homage. 
    26: Peter, however, raised him up, saying, “Get up. I myself am also a human being.” 
    27: While he conversed with him, he went in and found many people gathered together 
    28: and said to them, “You know that it is unlawful for a Jewish man to associate with, or visit, a Gentile, but God has shown me that I should not call any person profane or unclean. 
    29: And that is why I came without objection when sent for. May I ask, then, why you summoned me?”

    30: Cornelius replied, “Four days ago at this hour, three o’clock in the afternoon, I was at prayer in my house when suddenly a man in dazzling robes stood before me and said, 
    31: ‘Cornelius, your prayer has been heard and your almsgiving remembered before God. 
    32: Send therefore to Joppa and summon Simon, who is called Peter. He is a guest in the house of Simon, a tanner, by the sea.’ 
    33: So I sent for you immediately, and you were kind enough to come. Now therefore we are all here in the presence of God to listen to all that you have been commanded by the Lord.”
Peter’s Speech. 
    34: Then Peter proceeded to speak and said, “In truth, I see that God shows no partiality. 
    35: Rather, in every nation whoever fears him and acts uprightly is acceptable to him. 
    36: You know the word [that] he sent to the Israelites[o] as he proclaimed peace through Jesus Christ, who is Lord of all, 
    37: what has happened all over Judea, beginning in Galilee after the baptism that John preached, 
    38: how God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the holy Spirit and power. He went about doing good and healing all those oppressed by the devil, for God was with him. 
    39: We are witnesses of all that he did both in the country of the Jews and [in] Jerusalem. They put him to death by hanging him on a tree. 
    40: This man God raised  the third day and granted that he be visible, 
    41: not to all the people, but to us, the witnesses chosen by God in advance, who ate and drank with him after he rose from the dead. 
    42: He commissioned us to preach to the people and testify that he is the one appointed by God as judge of the living and the dead. 
    43: To him all the prophets bear witness, that everyone who believes in him will receive forgiveness of sins through his name.”
The Baptism of Cornelius. 
    44: While Peter was still speaking these things, the holy Spirit fell upon all who were listening to the word. 
    45: The circumcised believers who had accompanied Peter were astounded that the gift of the holy Spirit should have been poured out on the Gentiles also, 
    46: for they could hear them speaking in tongues and glorifying God. Then Peter responded, 
    47: “Can anyone withhold the water for baptizing these people, who have received the holy Spirit even as we have?” 
    48: He ordered them to be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ. 
    49: Then they invited him to stay for a few days.


  Chapter 11.

    1: 
The Baptism of the Gentiles Explained. 1 Now the apostles and the brothers who were in Judea heard that the Gentiles too had accepted the word of God. 
    2: So when Peter went up to Jerusalem the circumcised believers confronted him, 
    3: saying, “You entered the house of uncircumcised people and ate with them.” 
    4: Peter began and explained it to them step by step, saying, 
    5: “I was at prayer in the city of Joppa when in a trance I had a vision, something resembling a large sheet coming down, lowered from the sky by its four corners, and it came to me. 
    6: Looking intently into it, I observed and saw the four-legged animals of the earth, the wild beasts, the reptiles, and the birds of the sky. 
    7: I also heard a voice say to me, ‘Get up, Peter. Slaughter and eat.’ 
    8: But I said, ‘Certainly not, sir, because nothing profane or unclean has ever entered my mouth.’ 
    9: ut a second time a voice from heaven answered, ‘What God has made clean, you are not to call profane.’ 
    10: 
    11: The Baptism of the Gentiles Explained. 1 Now the apostles and the brothers who were in Judea heard that the Gentiles too had accepted the word of God. 2 So when Peter went up to Jerusalem the circumcised believers confronted him, 3 saying, “You entered[b] the house of uncircumcised people and ate with them.” 4 Peter began and explained it to them step by step, saying, 5 “I was at prayer in the city of Joppa when in a trance I had a vision, something resembling a large sheet coming down, lowered from the sky by its four corners, and it came to me. 6 Looking intently into it, I observed and saw the four-legged animals of the earth, the wild beasts, the reptiles, and the birds of the sky. 7 I also heard a voice say to me, ‘Get up, Peter. Slaughter and eat.’ 8 But I said, ‘Certainly not, sir, because nothing profane or unclean has ever entered my mouth.’ 9 But a second time a voice from heaven answered, ‘What God has made clean, you are not to call profane.’ 10 This happened three times, and then everything was drawn up again into the sky. 11 Just then three men appeared at the house where we were, who had been sent to me from Caesarea. 
    12: The Spirit told me to accompany them without discriminating. These six brothers also went with me, and we entered the man’s house. 
    13: He related to us how he had seen  angel standing in his house, saying, ‘Send someone to Joppa and summon Simon, who is called Peter, 
    14: who will speak words to you by which you and all your household will be saved.’ 
    15: As I began to speak, the holy Spirit fell upon them as it had upon us at the beginning, 
    16: and I remembered the word of the Lord, how he had said, ‘John baptized with water but you will be baptized with the holy Spirit.’ 
    17: If then God gave them the same gift he gave to us when we came to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I to be able to hinder God?” 
    18: When they heard this, they stopped objecting and glorified God, saying, “God has then granted life-giving repentance to the Gentiles too.”
The Church at Antioch. 
    19: Now those who had been scattered by the persecution that arose because of Stephen went as far as Phoenicia, Cyprus, and Antioch, preaching the word to no one but Jews. 
    20: There were some Cypriots and Cyrenians among them, however, who came to Antioch and began to speak to the Greeks as well, proclaiming the Lord Jesus. 
    21: The hand of the Lord was with them and a great number who believed turned to the Lord. 
    22: The news about them reached the ears of the church in Jerusalem, and they sent Barnabas  to Antioch. 
    23: When he arrived and saw the grace of God, he rejoiced and encouraged them all to remain faithful to the Lord in firmness of heart, 
    24: for he was a good man, filled with the holy Spirit and faith. And a large number of people was added to the Lord. 
    25: Then he went to Tarsus to look for Saul, 
    26: and when he had found him he brought him to Antioch. For a whole year they met with the church and taught a large number of people, and it was in Antioch that the disciples were first called Christians.
The Prediction of Agabus.[f] 
    27: At that time some prophets came down from Jerusalem to Antioch, 
    28: and one of them named Agabus stood up and predicted by the Spirit that there would be a severe famine all over the world, and it happened under Claudius. 
    29: So the disciples determined that, according to ability, each should send relief to the brothers who lived in Judea. 
    30: This they did, sending it to the presbyters in care of Barnabas and Saul.


  Chapter 12.

    1: 
    2: Herod’s Persecution of the Christians. 1 About that time King Herod laid hands upon some members of the church to harm them. 2 He had James, the brother of John,[b] killed by the sword, 
    3: and when he saw that this was pleasing to the Jews he proceeded to arrest Peter also. (It was [the] feast of Unleavened Bread.) 
    4: He had him taken into custody and put in prison under the guard of four squads of four soldiers each. He intended to bring him before the people after Passover. 
    5: Peter thus was being kept in prison, but prayer by the church was fervently being made to God on his behalf.

    6: On the very night before Herod was to bring him to trial, Peter, secured by double chains, was sleeping between two soldiers, while outside the door guards kept watch on the prison. 
    7: Suddenly the angel of the Lord stood by him and a light shone in the cell. He tapped Peter on the side and awakened him, saying, “Get up quickly.” The chains fell from his wrists. 
    8: The angel said to him, “Put on your belt and your sandals.” He did so. Then he said to him, “Put on your cloak and follow me.” 
    9: o he followed him out, not realizing that what was happening through the angel was real; he thought he was seeing a vision. 
    10: They passed the first guard, then the second, and came to the iron gate leading out to the city, which opened for them by itself. They emerged and made their way down an alley, and suddenly the angel left him. 
    11: 
    12: Herod’s Persecution of the Christians. 1 About that time King Herod laid hands upon some members of the church to harm them. 2 He had James, the brother of John,[b] killed by the sword, 3 [c]and when he saw that this was pleasing to the Jews he proceeded to arrest Peter also. (It was [the] feast of Unleavened Bread.) 4 He had him taken into custody and put in prison under the guard of four squads of four soldiers each. He intended to bring him before the people after Passover. 5 Peter thus was being kept in prison, but prayer by the church was fervently being made to God on his behalf.
6 On the very night before Herod was to bring him to trial, Peter, secured by double chains, was sleeping between two soldiers, while outside the door guards kept watch on the prison. 7 Suddenly the angel of the Lord stood by him and a light shone in the cell. He tapped Peter on the side and awakened him, saying, “Get up quickly.” The chains fell from his wrists. 8 The angel said to him, “Put on your belt and your sandals.” He did so. Then he said to him, “Put on your cloak and follow me.” 9 So he followed him out, not realizing that what was happening through the angel was real; he thought he was seeing a vision. 10 They passed the first guard, then the second, and came to the iron gate leading out to the city, which opened for them by itself. They emerged and made their way down an alley, and suddenly the angel left him. 11 Then Peter recovered his senses and said, “Now I know for certain that [the] Lord sent his angel and rescued me from the hand of Herod and from all that the Jewish people had been expecting.” 12 When he realized this, he went to the house of Mary, the mother of John who is called Mark, where there were many people gathered in prayer. 
    13: When he knocked on the gateway door, a maid named Rhoda came to answer it. 
    14: She was so overjoyed when she recognized Peter’s voice that, instead of opening the gate, she ran in and announced that Peter was standing at the gate. 
    15: They told her, “You are out of your mind,” but she insisted that it was so. But they kept saying, “It is his angel.” 
    16: But Peter continued to knock, and when they opened it, they saw him and were astounded. 
    17: He motioned to them with his hand to be quiet and explained  how the Lord had led him out of the prison, and said, “Report this to James[d] and the brothers.” Then he left and went to another place. 
    18: At daybreak there was no small commotion among the soldiers over what had become of Peter. 
    19: Herod, after instituting a search but not finding him, ordered the guards tried and executed. Then he left Judea to spend some time in Caesarea.
Herod’s Death. 
    20: He had long been very angry with the people of Tyre and Sidon, who now came to him in a body. After winning over Blastus, the king’s chamberlain, they sued for peace because their country was supplied with food from the king’s territory. 
    21: On an appointed day, Herod, attired in royal robes,  seated on the rostrum, addressed them publicly. 
    22: The assembled crowd cried out, “This is the voice of a god, not of a man.” 
    23: At once the angel of the Lord struck him down because he did not ascribe the honor to God, and he was eaten by worms and breathed his last. 
    24: But the word of God continued to spread and grow.
Mission of Barnabas and Saul. 
    25: After Barnabas and Saul completed their relief mission, they returned to Jerusalem, taking with them John, who is called Mark.


End of day 308.