Day 284:

Reading Matthew, chapters ['5', '6', '7', '8']:

  Chapter 5.

    1: When he saw the crowds,[b] he went up the mountain, and after he had sat down, his disciples came to him. 
    2: He began to teach them, saying:
The Beatitudes

    3: 
“Blessed are the poor in spirit,
    for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

    4: 
    5: The Sermon on the Mount. 1 When he saw the crowds,[b] he went up the mountain, and after he had sat down, his disciples came to him. 2 He began to teach them, saying:
The Beatitudes[c]
3 
“Blessed are the poor in spirit,[d]
    for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
4 
[e]Blessed are they who mourn,
    for they will be comforted.
5 
[f]Blessed are the meek,
    for they will inherit the land.

    6: 
Blessed are they who hunger and thirst for righteousness,
    for they will be satisfied.

    7: 
Blessed are the merciful,
    for they will be shown mercy.

    8: 
Blessed are the clean of heart,
    for they will see God.

    9: Blessed are the peacemakers,
    for they will be called children of God.

    10: 
Blessed are they who are persecuted for the sake of righteousness,
    for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

    11: Blessed are you when they insult you and persecute you and utter every kind of evil against you  because of me. 
    12: Rejoice and be glad, for your reward will be great in heaven. Thus they persecuted the prophets who were before you.
The Similes of Salt and Light.[k] 
    13: “You are the salt of the earth. But if salt loses its taste, with what can it be seasoned? It is no longer good for anything but to be thrown out and trampled underfoot. 
    14: You are the light of the world. A city set on a mountain cannot be hidden. 
    15: Nor do they light a lamp and then put it under a bushel basket; it is set on a lampstand, where it gives light to all in the house. 
    16: Just so, your light must shine before others, that they may see your good deeds and glorify your heavenly Father.
Teaching About the Law. 
    17: “Do not think that I have come to abolish the law or the prophets. I have come not to abolish but to fulfill. 
    18: Amen, I say to you, until heaven and earth pass away, not the smallest letter or the smallest part of a letter will pass from the law, until all things have taken place. 
    19: Therefore, whoever breaks one of the least of these commandments and teaches others to do so will be called least in the kingdom of heaven. But whoever obeys and teaches these commandments will be called greatest in the kingdom of heaven. 
    20: I tell you, unless your righteousness surpasses that of the scribes and Pharisees, you will not enter into the kingdom of heaven.
Teaching About Anger. 
    21: “You have heard that it was said to your ancestors, ‘You shall not kill; and whoever kills will be liable to judgment.’ 
    22: But I say to you, whoever is angry[r] with his brother will be liable to judgment, and whoever says to his brother, ‘Raqa,’ will be answerable to the Sanhedrin, and whoever says, ‘You fool,’ will be liable to fiery Gehenna. 
    23: Therefore, if you bring your gift to the altar, and there recall that your brother has anything against you, 
    24: leave your gift there at the altar, go first and be reconciled with your brother, and then come and offer your gift. 
    25: Settle with your opponent quickly while on the way to court with him. Otherwise your opponent will hand you over to the judge, and the judge will hand you over to the guard, and you will be thrown into prison. 
    26: Amen, I say to you, you will not be released until you have paid the last penny.
Teaching About Adultery. 
    27: “You have heard that it was said, ‘You shall not commit adultery.’ 
    28: But I say to you, everyone who looks at a woman with lust has already committed adultery with her in his heart. 
    29: If your right eye causes you to sin, tear it out and throw it away. It is better for you to lose one of your members than to have your whole body thrown into Gehenna. 
    30: And if your right hand causes you to sin, cut it off and throw it away. It is better for you to lose one of your members than to have your whole body go into Gehenna.
Teaching About Divorce. 
    31: “It was also said, ‘Whoever divorces his wife must give her a bill of divorce.’ 
    32: But I say to you, whoever divorces his wife (unless the marriage is unlawful) causes her to commit adultery, and whoever marries a divorced woman commits adultery.
Teaching About Oaths. 
    33: “Again you have heard that it was said to your ancestors, ‘Do not take a false oath, but make good to the Lord all that you vow.’ 
    34: But I say to you, do not swear at all; not by heaven, for it is God’s throne; 
    35: nor by the earth, for it is his footstool; nor by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great King. 
    36: Do not swear by your head, for you cannot make a single hair white or black. 
    37: Let your ‘Yes’ mean ‘Yes,’ and your ‘No’ mean ‘No.’ Anything more is from the evil one.
Teaching About Retaliation. 
    38: “You have heard that it was said, ‘An eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth.’ 
    39: But I say to you, offer no resistance to one who is evil. When someone strikes you on  right cheek, turn the other one to him as well. 
    40: If anyone wants to go to law with you over your tunic, hand him your cloak as well. 
    41: Should anyone press you into service for one mile, go with him for two miles. 
    42: Give to the one who asks of you, and do not turn your back on one who wants to borrow.
Love of Enemies. 
    43: “You have heard that it was said, ‘You shall love your neighbor and hate your enemy.’ 
    44: But I say to you, love your enemies, and pray for those who persecute you, 
    45: that you may be children of your heavenly Father, for he makes his sun rise on the bad and the good, and causes rain to fall on the just and the unjust. 
    46: For if you love those who love you, what recompense will you have? Do not the tax collectors do the same? 
    47: And if you greet your brothers only, what is unusual about that? Do not the pagans do the same? 
    48: So be perfect, just as your heavenly Father is perfect.


  Chapter 6.

    1: “ take care not to perform righteous deeds in order that people may see them; otherwise, you will have no recompense from your heavenly Father. 
    2: When you give alms, do not blow a trumpet before you, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets to win the praise of others. Amen, I say to you, they have received their reward. 
    3: But when you give alms, do not let your left hand know what your right is doing, 
    4: so that your almsgiving may be secret. And your Father who sees in secret will repay you.
Teaching About Prayer. 
    5: 
    6: Teaching About Almsgiving. 1 “[But] take care not to perform righteous deeds in order that people may see them; otherwise, you will have no recompense from your heavenly Father. 2 When you give alms, do not blow a trumpet before you, as the hypocrites[b] do in the synagogues and in the streets to win the praise of others. Amen, I say to you, they have received their reward. 3 But when you give alms, do not let your left hand know what your right is doing, 4 so that your almsgiving may be secret. And your Father who sees in secret will repay you.
Teaching About Prayer. 5 “When you pray, do not be like the hypocrites, who love to stand and pray in the synagogues and on street corners so that others may see them. Amen, I say to you, they have received their reward. 6 But when you pray, go to your inner room, close the door, and pray to your Father in secret. And your Father who sees in secret will repay you. 
    7: In praying, do not babble like the pagans, who think that they will be heard because of their many words.[d] 
    8: Do not be like them. Your Father knows what you need before you ask him.
The Lord’s Prayer. 
    9: e]“This is how you are to pray:
Our Father in heaven,[f]
    hallowed be your name,

    10: 
    your kingdom come,
    your will be done,
        on earth as in heaven.

    11: 
    Give us today our daily bread;

    12: 
    and forgive us our debts,
        as we forgive our debtors;

    13: 
    and do not subject us to the final test,
        but deliver us from the evil one.

    14: If you forgive others their transgressions, your heavenly Father will forgive you. 
    15: But if you do not forgive others, neither will your Father forgive your transgressions.
Teaching About Fasting. 
    16: “When you fast, do not look gloomy like the hypocrites. They neglect their appearance, so that they may appear to others to be fasting. Amen, I say to you, they have received their reward. 
    17: But when you fast, anoint your head and wash your face, 
    18: so that you may not appear to others to be fasting, except to your Father who is hidden. And your Father who sees what is hidden will repay you.
Treasure in Heaven. 
    19: “Do not store up for yourselves treasures on earth, where moth and decay destroy, and thieves break in and steal. 
    20: But store up treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor decay destroys, nor thieves break in and steal. 
    21: For where your treasure is, there also will your heart be.
The Light of the Body. 
    22: “The lamp of the body is the eye. If your eye is sound, your whole body will be filled with light; 
    23: but if your eye is bad, your whole body will be in darkness. And if the light in you is darkness, how great will the darkness be.
God and Money. 
    24: “No one can serve two masters. He will either hate one and love the other, or be devoted to one and despise the other. You cannot serve God and mammon.
Dependence on God.[p] 
    25: “Therefore I tell you, do not worry about your life, what you will eat , or about your body, what you will wear. Is not life more than food and the body more than clothing? 
    26: Look at the birds in the sky; they do not sow or reap, they gather nothing into barns, yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are not you more important than they? 
    27: Can any of you by worrying add a single moment to your life-span? 
    28: Why are you anxious about clothes? Learn from the way the wild flowers grow. They do not work or spin. 
    29: But I tell you that not even Solomon in all his splendor was clothed like one of them. 
    30: If God so clothes the grass of the field, which grows today and is thrown into the oven tomorrow, will he not much more provide for you, O you of little faith? 
    31: So do not worry and say, ‘What are we to eat?’ or ‘What are we to drink?’ or ‘What are we to wear?’ 
    32: All these things the pagans seek. Your heavenly Father knows that you need them all. 
    33: But seek first the kingdom  and his righteousness,[s] and all these things will be given you besides. 
    34: Do not worry about tomorrow; tomorrow will take care of itself. Sufficient for a day is its own evil.


  Chapter 7.

    1: “Stop judging,[b] that you may not be judged. 
    2: For as you judge, so will you be judged, and the measure with which you measure will be measured out to you. 
    3: Why do you notice the splinter in your brother’s eye, but do not perceive the wooden beam in your own eye? 
    4: How can you say to your brother, ‘Let me remove that splinter from your eye,’ while the wooden beam is in your eye? 
    5: You hypocrite, remove the wooden beam from your eye first; then you will see clearly to remove the splinter from your brother’s eye.
Pearls Before Swine. 
    6: 
    7: Judging Others. 1 “Stop judging,[b] that you may not be judged. 2 For as you judge, so will you be judged, and the measure with which you measure will be measured out to you. 3 Why do you notice the splinter in your brother’s eye, but do not perceive the wooden beam in your own eye? 4 How can you say to your brother, ‘Let me remove that splinter from your eye,’ while the wooden beam is in your eye? 5 You hypocrite,[c] remove the wooden beam from your eye first; then you will see clearly to remove the splinter from your brother’s eye.
Pearls Before Swine. 6 “Do not give what is holy to dogs,[d] or throw your pearls before swine, lest they trample them underfoot, and turn and tear you to pieces.
The Answer to Prayers. 7 “Ask and it will be given to you; seek and you will find; knock and the door will be opened to you. 
    8: For everyone who asks, receives; and the one who seeks, finds; and to the one who knocks, the door will be opened. 
    9: hich one of you would hand his son a stone when he asks for a loaf of bread, 
    10: or a snake when he asks for a fish? 
    11: If you then, who are wicked, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your heavenly Father give good things to those who ask him.
The Golden Rule. 
    12: “Do to others whatever you would have them do to you. This is the law and the prophets.
The Narrow Gate. 
    13: “Enter through the narrow gate;[h] for the gate is wide and the road broad that leads to destruction, and those who enter through it are many. 
    14: How narrow the gate and constricted the road that leads to life. And those who find it are few.
False Prophets. 
    15: “Beware of false prophets, who come to you in sheep’s clothing, but underneath are ravenous wolves. 
    16: By their fruits you will know them. Do people pick grapes from thornbushes, or figs from thistles? 
    17: Just so, every good tree bears good fruit, and a rotten tree bears bad fruit. 
    18: A good tree cannot bear bad fruit, nor can a rotten tree bear good fruit. 
    19: Every tree that does not bear good fruit will be cut down and thrown into the fire. 
    20: So by their fruits you will know them.
The True Disciple. 
    21: “Not everyone who says to me, ‘Lord, Lord,’ will enter the kingdom of heaven, but only the one who does the will of my Father in heaven. 
    22: Many will say to me on that day, ‘Lord, Lord, did we not prophesy in your name? Did we not drive out demons in your name? Did we not do mighty deeds in your name?’ 
    23: Then I will declare to them solemnly, ‘I never knew you. Depart from me, you evildoers.’
The Two Foundations. 
    24: “Everyone who listens to these words of mine and acts on them will be like a wise man who built his house on rock. 
    25: The rain fell, the floods came, and the winds blew and buffeted the house. But it did not collapse; it had been set solidly on rock. 
    26: And everyone who listens to these words of mine but does not act on them will be like a fool who built his house on sand. 
    27: The rain fell, the floods came, and the winds blew and buffeted the house. And it collapsed and was completely ruined.”

    28: When Jesus finished these words, the crowds were astonished at his teaching, 
    29: for he taught them as one having authority, and not as their scribes.


  Chapter 8.

    1: When Jesus came down from the mountain, great crowds followed him. 
    2: And then a leper approached, did him homage, and said, “Lord, if you wish, you can make me clean.” 
    3: He stretched out his hand, touched him, and said, “I will do it. Be made clean.” His leprosy was cleansed immediately. 
    4: Then Jesus said to him, “See that you tell no one, but go show yourself to the priest, and offer the gift that Moses prescribed; that will be proof for them.”
The Healing of a Centurion’s Servant.[d] 
    5: When he entered Capernaum, a centurion approached him and appealed to him, 
    6: saying, “Lord, my servant is lying at home paralyzed, suffering dreadfully.” 
    7: 
    8: The Cleansing of a Leper. 1 When Jesus came down from the mountain, great crowds followed him. 2 And then a leper approached, did him homage, and said, “Lord, if you wish, you can make me clean.” 3 He stretched out his hand, touched him, and said, “I will do it. Be made clean.” His leprosy was cleansed immediately. 4 [c]Then Jesus said to him, “See that you tell no one, but go show yourself to the priest, and offer the gift that Moses prescribed; that will be proof for them.”
The Healing of a Centurion’s Servant.[d] 5 When he entered Capernaum,[e] a centurion approached him and appealed to him, 6 saying, “Lord, my servant is lying at home paralyzed, suffering dreadfully.” 7 He said to him, “I will come and cure him.” 8 The centurion said in reply,[f] “Lord, I am not worthy to have you enter under my roof; only say the word and my servant will be healed. 
    9: or I too am a person subject to authority, with soldiers subject to me. And I say to one, ‘Go,’ and he goes; and to another, ‘Come here,’ and he comes; and to my slave, ‘Do this,’ and he does it.” 
    10: When Jesus heard this, he was amazed and said to those following him, “Amen, I say to you, in no one in Israel have I found such faith. 
    11: I say to you, many will come from the east and the west, and will recline with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob at the banquet in the kingdom of heaven, 
    12: but the children of the kingdom will be driven out into the outer darkness, where there will be wailing and grinding of teeth.” 
    13: And Jesus said to the centurion, “You may go; as you have believed, let it be done for you.” And at that very hour  servant was healed.
The Cure of Peter’s Mother-in-Law.[i] 
    14: Jesus entered the house of Peter, and saw his mother-in-law lying in bed with a fever. 
    15: He touched her hand, the fever left her, and she rose and waited on him.
Other Healings. 
    16: When it was evening, they brought him many who were possessed by demons, and he drove out the spirits by a word and cured all the sick, 
    17: to fulfill what had been said by Isaiah the prophet:
“He took away our infirmities
    and bore our diseases.”
The Would-be Followers of Jesus.[l] 
    18: When Jesus saw a crowd around him, he gave orders to cross to the other side. 
    19: A scribe approached and said to him, “Teacher, I will follow you wherever you go.” 
    20: Jesus answered him, “Foxes have dens and birds of the sky have nests, but the Son of Man has nowhere to rest his head.” 
    21: Another of  disciples said to him, “Lord, let me go first and bury my father.” 
    22: But Jesus answered him, “Follow me, and let the dead bury their dead.”
The Calming of the Storm at Sea. 
    23: He got into a boat and his disciples followed him. 
    24: Suddenly a violent storm came up on the sea, so that the boat was being swamped by waves; but he was asleep. 
    25: They came and woke him, saying, “Lord, save us! We are perishing!” 
    26: He said to them, “Why are you terrified, O you of little faith?” Then he got up, rebuked the winds and the sea, and there was great calm. 
    27: The men were amazed and said, “What sort of man is this, whom even the winds and the sea obey?”
The Healing of the Gadarene Demoniacs. 
    28: When he came to the other side, to the territory of the Gadarenes, two demoniacs who were coming from the tombs met him. They were so savage that no one could travel by that road. 
    29: They cried out, “What have you to do with us, Son of God? Have you come here to torment us before the appointed time?” 
    30: Some distance away a herd of many swine was feeding. 
    31: The demons pleaded with him, “If you drive us out, send us into the herd of swine.” 
    32: And he said to them, “Go then!” They came out and entered the swine, and the whole herd rushed down the steep bank into the sea where they drowned. 
    33: The swineherds ran away, and when they came to the town they reported everything, including what had happened to the demoniacs. 
    34: Thereupon the whole town came out to meet Jesus, and when they saw him they begged him to leave their district.


End of day 284.