Day 315:

Reading Romans, chapters ['9', '10', '11', '12']:

  Chapter 9.

    1: I speak the truth in Christ, I do not lie; my conscience joins with the holy Spirit in bearing me witness 
    2: that I have great sorrow and constant anguish in my heart. 
    3: For I could wish that I myself were accursed and separated from Christ for the sake of my brothers, my kin according to the flesh. 
    4: They are Israelites; theirs the adoption, the glory, the covenants, the giving of the law, the worship, and the promises; 
    5: theirs the patriarchs, and from them, according to the flesh, is the Messiah. God who is over all be blessed forever. Amen.
God’s Free Choice. 
    6: But it is not that the word of God has failed. For not all who are of Israel are Israel, 
    7: nor are they all children of Abraham because they are his descendants; but “It is through Isaac that descendants shall bear your name.” 
    8: 
    9: aul’s Love for Israel. 1 I speak the truth in Christ, I do not lie; my conscience joins with the holy Spirit in bearing me witness 2 that I have great sorrow and constant anguish in my heart. 3 For I could wish that I myself were accursed and separated from Christ for the sake of my brothers, my kin according to the flesh. 4 They are Israelites; theirs the adoption, the glory, the covenants, the giving of the law, the worship, and the promises; 5 theirs the patriarchs, and from them, according to the flesh, is the Messiah. God who is over all[c] be blessed forever. Amen.
God’s Free Choice. 6 But it is not that the word of God has failed. For not all who are of Israel are Israel, 7 nor are they all children of Abraham because they are his descendants; but “It is through Isaac that descendants shall bear your name.” 8 This means that it is not the children of the flesh who are the children of God, but the children of the promise are counted as descendants. 9 For this is the wording of the promise, “About this time I shall return and Sarah will have a son.” 
    10: And not only that, but also when Rebecca had conceived children by one husband, our father Isaac— 
    11: before they had yet been born or had done anything, good or bad, in order that God’s elective plan might continue, 
    12: not by works but by his call—she was told, “The older shall serve the younger.” 
    13: As it is written:
“I loved Jacob
    but hated Esau.”

    14: What then are we to say? Is there injustice on the part of God? Of course not! 
    15: For he says to Moses:
“I will show mercy to whom I will,
    I will take pity on whom I will.”

    16: So it depends not upon a person’s will or exertion, but upon God, who shows mercy. 
    17: For the scripture says to Pharaoh, “This is why I have raised you up, to show my power through you that my name may be proclaimed throughout the earth.” 
    18: Consequently, he has mercy upon whom he wills, and he hardens whom he wills.

    19: You will say to me then, “Why [then] does he still find fault? For who can oppose his will?” 
    20: But who indeed are you, a human being, to talk back to God? Will what is made say to its maker, “Why have you created me so?” 
    21: Or does not the potter have a right over the clay, to make out of the same lump one vessel for a noble purpose and another for an ignoble one? 
    22: What if God, wishing to show his wrath and make known his power, has endured with much patience the vessels of wrath made for destruction? 
    23: This was to make known the riches of his glory to the vessels of mercy, which he has prepared previously for glory, 
    24: namely, us whom he has called, not only from the Jews but also from the Gentiles.
Witness of the Prophets. 
    25: As indeed he says in Hosea:
“Those who were not my people I will call ‘my people,’
    and her who was not beloved I will call ‘beloved.’

    26: 
And in the very place where it was said to them, ‘You are not my people,’
    there they shall be called children of the living God.”

    27: And Isaiah cries out concerning Israel, “Though the number of the Israelites were like the sand of the sea, only a remnant will be saved; 
    28: for decisively and quickly will the Lord execute sentence upon the earth.” 
    29: And as Isaiah predicted:
“Unless the Lord of hosts had left us descendants,
    we would have become like Sodom
    and have been made like Gomorrah.”
Righteousness Based on Faith. 
    30: What then shall we say? That Gentiles, who did not pursue righteousness, have achieved it, that is, righteousness that comes from faith; 
    31: but that Israel, who pursued the law of righteousness, did not attain to that law? 
    32: Why not? Because they did it not by faith, but as if it could be done by works. They stumbled over the stone that causes stumbling, 
    33: as it is written:
“Behold, I am laying a stone in Zion
    that will make people stumble
    and a rock that will make them fall,
and whoever believes in him shall not be put to shame.”


  Chapter 10.

    1: 
1 Brothers, my heart’s desire and prayer to God on their behalf is for salvation. 
    2: I testify with regard to them that they have zeal for God, but it is not discerning. 
    3: For, in their unawareness of the righteousness that comes from God and their attempt to establish their own , they did not submit to the righteousness of God. 
    4: For Christ is the end of the law for the justification of everyone who has faith.

    5: Moses writes about the righteousness that comes from [the] law, “The one who does these things will live by them.” 
    6: But the righteousness that comes from faith says, “Do not say in your heart, ‘Who will go up into heaven?’ (that is, to bring Christ down) 
    7: or ‘Who will go down into the abyss?’ (that is, to bring Christ up from the dead).” 
    8: But what does it say?
“The word is near you,
    in your mouth and in your heart”
(that is, the word of faith that we preach), 
    9: 
    10: 1 Brothers, my heart’s desire and prayer to God on their behalf is for salvation. 2 I testify with regard to them that they have zeal for God, but it is not discerning. 3 For, in their unawareness of the righteousness that comes from God and their attempt to establish their own [righteousness], they did not submit to the righteousness of God. 4 For Christ is the end[b] of the law for the justification of everyone who has faith.
5 [c]Moses writes about the righteousness that comes from [the] law, “The one who does these things will live by them.” 6 But the righteousness that comes from faith says, “Do not say in your heart, ‘Who will go up into heaven?’ (that is, to bring Christ down) 7 [d]or ‘Who will go down into the abyss?’ (that is, to bring Christ up from the dead).” 8 But what does it say?
“The word is near you,
    in your mouth and in your heart”
(that is, the word of faith that we preach), 9 for, if you confess[e] with your mouth that Jesus is Lord and believe in your heart that God raised him from the dead, you will be saved. 10 For one believes with the heart and so is justified, and one confesses with the mouth and so is saved. 
    11: For the scripture says, “No one who believes in him will be put to shame.” 
    12: For there is no distinction between Jew and Greek; the same Lord is Lord of all, enriching all who call upon him. 
    13: For “everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved.”

    14: But how can they call on him in whom they have not believed? And how can they believe in him of whom they have not heard? And how can they hear without someone to preach? 
    15: And how can people preach unless they are sent? As it is written, “How beautiful are the feet of those who bring  good news!”[g] 
    16: But not everyone has heeded the good news; for Isaiah says, “Lord, who has believed what was heard from us?” 
    17: Thus faith comes from what is heard, and what is heard comes through the word of Christ. 
    18: But I ask, did they not hear? Certainly they did; for
“Their voice has gone forth to all the earth,
    and their words to the ends of the world.”

    19: But I ask, did not Israel understand? First Moses says:
“I will make you jealous of those who are not a nation;
    with a senseless nation I will make you angry.”

    20: Then Isaiah speaks boldly and says:
“I was found  those who were not seeking me;
    I revealed myself to those who were not asking for me.”

    21: But regarding Israel he says, “All day long I stretched out my hands to a disobedient and contentious people.”


  Chapter 11.

    1: 
The Remnant of Israel. 1 I ask, then, has God rejected his people? Of course not! For I too am an Israelite, a descendant of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin. 
    2: God has not rejected his people whom he foreknew. Do you not know what the scripture says about Elijah, how he pleads with God against Israel? 
    3: “Lord, they have killed your prophets, they have torn down your altars, and I alone am left, and they are seeking my life.” 
    4: But what is God’s response to him? “I have left for myself seven thousand men who have not knelt to Baal.” 
    5: So also at the present time there is a remnant, chosen by grace. 
    6: But if by grace, it is no longer because of works; otherwise grace would no longer be grace. 
    7: What then? What Israel was seeking it did not attain, but the elect attained it; the rest were hardened, 
    8: as it is written:
“God gave them a spirit of deep sleep,
    eyes that should not see
    and ears that should not hear,
down to this very day.”

    9: nd David says:
“Let their table become a snare and a trap,
    a stumbling block and a retribution for them;

    10: 
    11: The Remnant of Israel. 1 I ask, then, has God rejected his people? Of course not! For I too am an Israelite, a descendant of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin. 2 God has not rejected his people whom he foreknew. Do you not know what the scripture says about Elijah, how he pleads with God against Israel? 3 “Lord, they have killed your prophets, they have torn down your altars, and I alone am left, and they are seeking my life.” 4 But what is God’s response to him? “I have left for myself seven thousand men who have not knelt to Baal.” 5 So also at the present time there is a remnant, chosen by grace. 6 But if by grace, it is no longer because of works; otherwise grace would no longer be grace. 7 What then? What Israel was seeking it did not attain, but the elect attained it; the rest were hardened, 8 as it is written:
“God gave them a spirit of deep sleep,
    eyes that should not see
    and ears that should not hear,
down to this very day.”
9 And David says:
“Let their table become a snare and a trap,
    a stumbling block and a retribution for them;
10 
let their eyes grow dim so that they may not see,
    and keep their backs bent forever.”
The Gentiles’ Salvation. 11 [b]Hence I ask, did they stumble so as to fall? Of course not! But through their transgression salvation has come to the Gentiles, so as to make them jealous. 
    12: Now if their transgression is enrichment for the world, and if their diminished number is enrichment for the Gentiles, how much more their full number.

    13: Now I am speaking to you Gentiles. Inasmuch then as I am the apostle to the Gentiles, I glory in my ministry 
    14: in order to make my race jealous and thus save some of them. 
    15: For if their rejection is the reconciliation of the world, what will their acceptance be but life from the dead? 
    16: If the firstfruits are holy, so is the whole batch of dough; and if the root is holy, so are the branches.

    17: But if some of the branches were broken off, and you, a wild olive shoot, were grafted in their place and have come to share in the rich root of the olive tree, 
    18: do not boast against the branches. If you do boast, consider that you do not support the root; the root supports you. 
    19: Indeed you will say, “Branches were broken off so that I might be grafted in.” 
    20: That is so. They were broken off because of unbelief, but you are there because of faith. So do not become haughty, but stand in awe. 
    21: For if God did not spare the natural branches,  he will not spare you either. 
    22: See, then, the kindness and severity of God: severity toward those who fell, but God’s kindness to you, provided you remain in his kindness; otherwise you too will be cut off. 
    23: And they also, if they do not remain in unbelief, will be grafted in, for God is able to graft them in again. 
    24: For if you were cut from what is by nature a wild olive tree, and grafted, contrary to nature, into a cultivated one, how much more will they who belong to it by nature be grafted back into their own olive tree.
God’s Irrevocable Call. 
    25: I do not want you to be unaware of this mystery, brothers, so that you will not become wise  your own estimation: a hardening has come upon Israel in part, until the full number of the Gentiles comes in, 
    26: and thus all Israel will be saved, as it is written:
“The deliverer will come out of Zion,
    he will turn away godlessness from Jacob;

    27: 
and this is my covenant with them
    when I take away their sins.”

    28: In respect to the gospel, they are enemies on your account; but in respect to election, they are beloved because of the patriarchs. 
    29: For the gifts and the call of God are irrevocable.
Triumph of God’s Mercy. 
    30: Just as you once disobeyed God but have now received mercy because of their disobedience, 
    31: so they have now disobeyed in order that, by virtue of the mercy shown to you, they too may  receive mercy. 
    32: For God delivered all to disobedience, that he might have mercy upon all.

    33: Oh, the depth of the riches and wisdom and knowledge of God! How inscrutable are his judgments and how unsearchable his ways!

    34: 
“For who has known the mind of the Lord
    or who has been his counselor?”

    35: 
“Or who has given him anything
    that he may be repaid?”

    36: For from him and through him and for him are all things. To him be glory forever. Amen.


  Chapter 12.

    1: 
    2: Sacrifice of Body and Mind. 1 I urge you therefore, brothers, by the mercies of God, to offer your bodies as a living sacrifice, holy and pleasing to God, your spiritual worship. 2 Do not conform yourselves to this age but be transformed by the renewal of your mind, that you may discern what is the will of God, what is good and pleasing and perfect.
Many Parts in One Body. 
    3: For by the grace given to me I tell everyone among you not to think of himself more highly than one ought to think, but to think soberly, each according to the measure of faith that God has apportioned. 
    4: For as in one body we have many parts, and all the parts do not have the same function, 
    5: so we, though many, are one body in Christ and individually parts of one another. 
    6: Since we have gifts that differ according to the grace given to us, let us exercise them: if prophecy, in proportion to the faith; 
    7: if ministry, in ministering; if one is a teacher, in teaching; 
    8: if one exhorts, in exhortation; if one contributes, in generosity; if one is over others, with diligence; if one does acts of mercy, with cheerfulness.
Mutual Love. 
    9: et love be sincere; hate what is evil, hold on to what is good; 
    10: love one another with mutual affection; anticipate one another in showing honor. 
    11: 
    12: Sacrifice of Body and Mind. 1 I urge you therefore, brothers, by the mercies of God, to offer your bodies as a living sacrifice, holy and pleasing to God, your spiritual worship. 2 Do not conform yourselves to this age but be transformed by the renewal of your mind, that you may discern what is the will of God, what is good and pleasing and perfect.
Many Parts in One Body. 3 For by the grace given to me I tell everyone among you not to think of himself more highly than one ought to think, but to think soberly, each according to the measure of faith that God has apportioned. 4 For as in one body we have many parts, and all the parts do not have the same function, 5 so we, though many, are one body in Christ[c] and individually parts of one another. 6 Since we have gifts that differ according to the grace given to us, let us exercise them:[d] if prophecy, in proportion to the faith; 7 if ministry, in ministering; if one is a teacher, in teaching; 8 if one exhorts, in exhortation; if one contributes, in generosity; if one is over others,[e] with diligence; if one does acts of mercy, with cheerfulness.
Mutual Love. 9 Let love be sincere; hate what is evil, hold on to what is good; 10 love one another with mutual affection; anticipate one another in showing honor. 11 Do not grow slack in zeal, be fervent in spirit, serve the Lord. 12 Rejoice in hope, endure in affliction, persevere in prayer. 
    13: Contribute to the needs of the holy ones, exercise hospitality. 
    14: Bless those who persecute [you], bless and do not curse them. 
    15: Rejoice with those who rejoice, weep with those who weep. 
    16: Have the same regard for one another; do not be haughty but associate with the lowly; do not be wise in your own estimation. 
    17: Do not repay anyone evil for evil; be concerned for what is noble in the sight of all. 
    18: If possible, on your part, live at peace with all. 
    19: Beloved, do not look for revenge but leave room for the wrath; for it is written, “Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord.” 
    20: Rather, “if your enemy is hungry, feed him; if he is thirsty, give him something to drink; for by so doing you will heap burning coals upon his head.” 
    21: Do not be conquered by evil but conquer evil with good.


End of day 315.