Day 82:

Reading 2-Kings, chapters ['1', '2', '3', '4']:

  Chapter 1.

    1: Reign of Ahaziah, Continued. 1 After Ahab’s death, Moab rebelled against Israel.

    2: Ahaziah fell through the lattice of his roof terrace at Samaria and was injured. So he sent out messengers with the instructions: “Go and inquire of Baalzebub, the god of Ekron, whether I shall recover from this injury.”

    3: Meanwhile, the messenger of the Lord said to Elijah the Tishbite: Go and meet the messengers of Samaria’s king, and tell them: “Is it because there is no God in Israel that you are going to inquire of Baalzebub, the god of Ekron?” 
    4: For this, the Lord says: You shall not leave the bed upon which you lie; instead, you shall die. And Elijah departed. 
    5: The messengers then returned to Ahaziah, who asked them, “Why have you returned?” 
    6: They answered, “A man met us and said to us, ‘Go back to the king who sent you and tell him: The Lord says: Is it because there is no God in Israel that you are sending to inquire of Baalzebub, the god of Ekron? For this you shall not leave the bed upon which you lie; instead, you shall die.’” 
    7: The king asked them, “What was the man like who met you and said these things to you?” 
    8: They replied, “He wore a hairy garment with a leather belt around his waist.” “It is Elijah the Tishbite!” he exclaimed.

    9: hen the king sent a captain with his company of fifty men after Elijah. The prophet was seated on a hilltop when he found him. He said, “Man of God, the king commands you, ‘Come down.’” 
    10: Elijah answered the captain, “Well, if I am a man of God, may fire come down from heaven and consume you and your fifty men.” And fire came down from heaven and consumed him and his fifty men. 
    11: The king sent another captain with his company of fifty men after Elijah. He shouted up and said, “Man of God, the king says, ‘Come down immediately!’” 
    12: Elijah answered them, “If I am a man of God, may fire come down from heaven and consume you and your fifty men.” And divine fire came down from heaven and consumed him and his fifty men. 
    13: The king sent a third captain with his company of fifty men. When the third captain had climbed the hill, he fell to his knees before Elijah, pleading with him. He said, “Man of God, let my life and the lives of these fifty men, your servants, count for something in your sight! 
    14: Already fire has come down from heaven, consuming the first two captains with their companies of fifty men. But now, let my life count for something in your sight!” 
    15: Then the messenger of the Lord said to Elijah: Go down with him; you need not be afraid of him. So Elijah left and went down with him to the king. 
    16: He declared to the king: “Thus says the Lord: Because you sent messengers to inquire of Baalzebub, the god of Ekron—do you think there is no God in Israel to inquire of?—you shall not leave the bed upon which you lie; instead you shall die.”

    17: Ahaziah died according to the word of the Lord spoken by Elijah. Since he had no son, Joram succeeded him as king, in the second year of Joram, son of Jehoshaphat, king of Judah.

    18: The rest of the acts of Ahaziah, which he did, are recorded in the book of chronicles of the kings of Israel.


  Chapter 2.

    1: 
    2: Elijah’s Journey. 1 When the Lord was about to take Elijah up to heaven in a whirlwind, he and Elisha were on their way from Gilgal.
2 Elijah said to Elisha, “Stay here, please. The Lord has sent me on to Bethel.” Elisha replied, “As the Lord lives, and as you yourself live, I will not leave you.” So they went down to Bethel. 
    3: The guild prophets who were in Bethel went out to Elisha and asked him, “Do you know that today the Lord will take your master from you?” He replied, “Yes, I know that. Be still.”

    4: Elijah said to him, “Elisha, stay here, please. The Lord has sent me on to Jericho.” Elisha replied, “As the Lord lives, and as you yourself live, I will not leave you.” So they came to Jericho. 
    5: The guild prophets who were in Jericho approached Elisha and asked him, “Do you know that today the Lord will take your master from you?” He replied, “Yes, I know that. Be still.”

    6: Elijah said to him, “Stay here, please. The Lord has sent me on to the Jordan.” Elisha replied, “As the Lord lives, and as you yourself live, I will not leave you.” So the two went on together. 
    7: Fifty of the guild prophets followed and stood facing them at a distance, while the two of them stood next to the Jordan.
Elisha Succeeds Elijah. 
    8: Elijah took his mantle, rolled it up and struck the water: it divided, and the two of them crossed over on dry ground.

    9: hen they had crossed over, Elijah said to Elisha, “Request whatever I might do for you, before I am taken from you.” Elisha answered, “May I receive a double portion of your spirit.” 
    10: He replied, “You have asked something that is not easy. Still, if you see me taken up from you, your wish will be granted; otherwise not.” 
    11: As they walked on still conversing, a fiery chariot and fiery horses came between the two of them, and Elijah went up to heaven in a whirlwind, 
    12: and Elisha saw it happen. He cried out, “My father! my father! Israel’s chariot and steeds!” Then he saw him no longer.
He gripped his own garment, tore it into two pieces, 
    13: and picked up the mantle which had fallen from Elijah. Then he went back and stood at the bank of the Jordan. 
    14: Wielding the mantle which had fallen from Elijah, he struck the water and said, “The Lord, the God of Elijah—where is he now?” He struck the water: it divided, and he crossed over.
Elisha’s Journey. 
    15: The guild prophets in Jericho, who were on the other side, saw him and said, “The spirit of Elijah rests on Elisha.” They went to meet him, bowing to the ground before him. 
    16: They said, “Among your servants are fifty brave men. Let them go in search of your master. Perhaps the spirit of the Lord has lifted him up and left him on some mountain or in some valley.” He answered, “Do not send them.” 
    17: But they kept urging him, until he was embarrassed and said, “Send them.” So they sent the fifty men, who searched for three days without finding him. 
    18: When they returned to Elisha in Jericho, where he was staying, he said to them, “Did I not tell you not to go?”

    19: The inhabitants of the city complained to Elisha, “The site of the city is fine indeed, as my lord can see, but the water is bad and the land sterile.” 
    20: Elisha said, “Bring me a new bowl and put salt into it.” When they had brought it to him, 
    21: he went out to the spring and threw salt into it, saying, “Thus says the Lord: I have purified this water. Never again shall death or sterility come from it.” 
    22: And the water has stayed pure even to this day, according to the word Elisha had spoken.

    23: From there Elisha went up to Bethel. While he was on the way, some little boys came out of the city and jeered at him: “Go away, baldy; go away, baldy!” 
    24: The prophet turned and saw them, and he cursed them in the name of the Lord. Then two she-bears came out of the woods and tore forty-two of the children to pieces.

    25: From there he went to Mount Carmel, and returned to Samaria from there.


  Chapter 3.

    1: Joram, son of Ahab, became king over Israel in Samaria in the eighteenth year of Jehoshaphat, king of Judah, and he reigned twelve years.

    2: 
    3: Reign of Joram of Israel. 1 Joram, son of Ahab, became king over Israel in Samaria in the eighteenth year of Jehoshaphat, king of Judah, and he reigned twelve years.
2 He did what was evil in the Lord’s sight, though not like his father and mother. He did away with the pillar of Baal that his father had made, 3 but he still held fast unceasingly to the sins which Jeroboam, son of Nebat, caused Israel to commit.
War Against Moab: Drought. 
    4: Now Mesha, king of Moab, who raised sheep, used to pay the king of Israel as tribute a hundred thousand lambs and the wool of a hundred thousand rams. 
    5: But when Ahab died, the king of Moab rebelled against the king of Israel. 
    6: King Joram set out from Samaria and mustered all Israel. 
    7: Then he sent Jehoshaphat, the king of Judah, the message: “The king of Moab has rebelled against me. Will you come with me to Moab to fight?” He replied, “I will. You and I are as one, your people and my people, and your horses and my horses as well.” 
    8: He said, “By what route shall we attack?” and the other said, “By way of the wilderness of Edom.”

    9: o the king of Israel set out, accompanied by the king of Judah and the king of Edom. After a roundabout journey of seven days the water gave out for the army and for the animals with them. 
    10: The king of Israel exclaimed, “Alas! The Lord has called three kings together only to deliver us into the power of Moab.” 
    11: But Jehoshaphat asked, “Is there no prophet of the Lord here through whom we may inquire of the Lord?” One of the servants of the king of Israel replied, “Elisha, son of Shaphat, who poured water on the hands of Elijah, is here.” 
    12: Jehoshaphat agreed, “He has the word of the Lord.” So the king of Israel, along with Jehoshaphat and the king of Edom, went down to Elisha. 
    13: Elisha asked the king of Israel, “What do you want with me? Go to the prophets of your father and to the prophets of your mother.” The king of Israel replied, “No, the Lord has called these three kings together only to deliver us into the power of Moab.” 
    14: Then Elisha said, “As the Lord of hosts lives, whom I serve, were it not that I respect Jehoshaphat, the king of Judah, I should neither look at you nor notice you at all. 
    15: Now get me a minstrel.” When the minstrel played, the hand of the Lord came upon Elisha, 
    16: and he announced: “Thus says the Lord: Provide many catch basins in this wadi. 
    17: For the Lord says: Though you will see neither wind nor rain, yet this wadi will be filled with water for you to drink, and for your livestock and pack animals. 
    18: And since the Lord does not consider this enough, he will also deliver Moab into your power. 
    19: You shall destroy every fortified city and every choice city, fell every fruit tree, stop up all the springs, and ruin every fertile field with stones.”

    20: In the morning, at the time of the sacrifice, water came from the direction of Edom and filled the land.

    21: Meanwhile, all Moab had heard that the kings had come to war against them; troops from the youngest on up were mobilized and stationed at the border. 
    22: When they rose early that morning, the sun was shining across the water. The Moabites saw the water as red as blood, 
    23: and said, “This is blood! The kings have fought among themselves and killed one another. Quick! To the spoils, Moab!” 
    24: But when they reached the camp of Israel, the Israelites rose up and attacked the Moabites, who fled from them. They ranged through the countryside destroying Moab— 
    25: leveling the cities, each one casting the stones onto every fertile field and filling it, stopping up every spring, felling every fruit tree, until only the stones of Kir-hareseth remained. Then the slingers surrounded and attacked it. 
    26: When he saw that the battle was going against him, the king of Moab took seven hundred swordsmen to break through to the king of Edom, but he failed. 
    27: So he took his firstborn, who was to succeed him as king, and offered him as a burnt offering upon the wall. The wrath against Israel was so great that they gave up the siege and returned to their own land.


  Chapter 4.

    1: A certain woman, the widow of one of the guild prophets, cried out to Elisha: “My husband, your servant, is dead. You know that he revered the Lord, yet now his creditor has come to take my two children into servitude.” 
    2: Elisha answered her, “What am I to do for you? Tell me what you have in the house.” She replied, “This servant of yours has nothing in the house but a jug of oil.” 
    3: 
    4: The Widow’s Oil. 1 A certain woman, the widow of one of the guild prophets, cried out to Elisha: “My husband, your servant, is dead. You know that he revered the Lord, yet now his creditor has come to take my two children into servitude.” 2 Elisha answered her, “What am I to do for you? Tell me what you have in the house.” She replied, “This servant of yours has nothing in the house but a jug of oil.” 3 He said, “Go out, borrow vessels from all your neighbors—as many empty vessels as you can. 4 Then come back and close the door on yourself and your children; pour the oil into all the vessels, and as each is filled, set it aside.” 
    5: So she went out. She closed the door on herself and her children and, as they handed her the vessels, she would pour in oil. 
    6: When all the vessels were filled, she said to her son, “Bring me another vessel.” He answered, “There is none left.” And then the oil stopped. 
    7: She went and told the man of God, who said, “Go sell the oil to pay off your creditor; with what remains, you and your children can live.”
Elisha Raises the Shunammite’s Son. 
    8: One day Elisha came to Shunem, where there was a woman of influence, who pressed him to dine with her. Afterward, whenever he passed by, he would stop there to dine. 
    9: o she said to her husband, “I know that he is a holy man of God. Since he visits us often, 
    10: let us arrange a little room on the roof and furnish it for him with a bed, table, chair, and lamp, so that when he comes to us he can stay there.”

    11: One day Elisha arrived and stayed in the room overnight. 
    12: Then he said to his servant Gehazi, “Call this Shunammite woman.” He did so, and when she stood before Elisha, 
    13: he told Gehazi, “Say to her, ‘You have troubled yourself greatly for us; what can we do for you? Can we say a good word for you to the king or to the commander of the army?’” She replied, “I am living among my own people.” 
    14: Later Elisha asked, “What can we do for her?” Gehazi answered, “She has no son, and her husband is old.” 
    15: Elisha said, “Call her.” He did so, and when she stood at the door, 
    16: Elisha promised, “This time next year you will be cradling a baby son.” She said, “My lord, you are a man of God; do not deceive your servant.” 
    17: Yet the woman conceived, and by the same time the following year she had given birth to a son, as Elisha had promised; 
    18: and the child grew up healthy.
One day the boy went out to his father among the reapers. 
    19: He said to his father, “My head! My head!” And his father said to the servant, “Carry him to his mother.” 
    20: The servant picked him up and carried him to his mother; he sat in her lap until noon, and then died. 
    21: She went upstairs and laid him on the bed of the man of God. Closing the door on him, she went out 
    22: and called to her husband, “Let me have one of the servants and a donkey. I must go quickly to the man of God, and I will be back.” 
    23: He asked, “Why are you going to him today? It is neither the new moon nor the sabbath.” But she said, “It is all right.” 
    24: When the donkey was saddled, she said to her servant, “Lead on! Do not stop my donkey unless I tell you.” 
    25: She kept going till she reached the man of God on Mount Carmel. When he saw her at a distance, the man of God said to his servant Gehazi: “There is the Shunammite! 
    26: Hurry to meet her, and ask if everything is all right with her, with her husband, and with the boy.” “Everything is all right,” she replied. 
    27: But when she reached the man of God on the mountain, she clasped his feet. Gehazi came near to push her away, but the man of God said: “Let her alone, she is in bitter anguish; the Lord hid it from me and did not let me know.” 
    28: She said, “Did I ask my lord for a son? Did I not say, ‘Do not mislead me’?” 
    29: He said to Gehazi, “Get ready for a journey. Take my staff with you and be off; if you meet anyone, give no greeting, and if anyone greets you, do not answer. Lay my staff upon the boy.” 
    30: But the boy’s mother cried out: “As the Lord lives and as you yourself live, I will not release you.” So he started back with her.

    31: Meanwhile, Gehazi had gone on ahead and had laid the staff upon the boy, but there was no sound, no response. He returned to meet Elisha and told him, “The boy has not awakened.” 
    32: When Elisha reached the house, he found the boy dead, lying on the bed. 
    33: He went in, closed the door on them both, and prayed to the Lord. 
    34: Then he lay upon the child on the bed, placing his mouth upon the child’s mouth, his eyes upon the eyes, and his hands upon the hands. As Elisha stretched himself over the child, the boy’s flesh became warm. 
    35: He arose, paced up and down the room, and then once more stretched himself over him, and the boy sneezed seven times and opened his eyes. 
    36: Elisha summoned Gehazi and said, “Call the Shunammite.” He called her, and she came to him, and Elisha said to her, “Take your son.” 
    37: She came in and fell at his feet in homage; then she took her son and left.
The Poisoned Stew. 
    38: When Elisha returned to Gilgal, there was a famine in the land. Once, when the guild prophets were seated before him, he said to his servant, “Put the large pot on, and make some vegetable stew for the guild prophets.” 
    39: Someone went out into the field to gather herbs and found a wild vine, from which he picked a sackful of poisonous wild gourds. On his return he cut them up into the pot of vegetable stew without anybody’s knowing it. 
    40: The stew was served, but when they began to eat it, they cried, “Man of God, there is death in the pot!” And they could not eat it. 
    41: He said, “Bring some meal.” He threw it into the pot and said, “Serve it to the people to eat.” And there was no longer anything harmful in the pot.
The Barley Loaves. 
    42: A man came from Baal-shalishah bringing the man of God twenty barley loaves made from the first fruits, and fresh grain in the ear. Elisha said, “Give it to the people to eat.” 
    43: But his servant objected, “How can I set this before a hundred?” Elisha again said, “Give it to the people to eat, for thus says the Lord: You will eat and have some left over.” 
    44: He set it before them, and when they had eaten, they had some left over, according to the word of the Lord.


End of day 82.