Day 291:

Reading Mark, chapters ['5', '6', '7', '8']:

  Chapter 5.

    1: They came to the other side of the sea, to the territory of the Gerasenes. 
    2: When he got out of the boat, at once a man from the tombs who had an unclean spirit met him. 
    3: The man had been dwelling among the tombs, and no one could restrain him any longer, even with a chain. 
    4: 
    5: The Healing of the Gerasene Demoniac. 1 They came to the other side of the sea, to the territory of the Gerasenes. 2 When he got out of the boat, at once a man[b] from the tombs who had an unclean spirit met him. 3 The man had been dwelling among the tombs, and no one could restrain him any longer, even with a chain. 4 In fact, he had frequently been bound with shackles and chains, but the chains had been pulled apart by him and the shackles smashed, and no one was strong enough to subdue him. 5 Night and day among the tombs and on the hillsides he was always crying out and bruising himself with stones. 
    6: Catching sight of Jesus from a distance, he ran up and prostrated himself before him, 
    7: crying out in a loud voice, “What have you to do with me, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? I adjure you by God, do not torment me!” 
    8: (He had been saying to him, “Unclean spirit, come out of the man!”) 
    9: d]He asked him, “What is your name?” He replied, “Legion is my name. There are many of us.” 
    10: And he pleaded earnestly with him not to drive them away from that territory.

    11: Now a large herd of swine was feeding there on the hillside. 
    12: And they pleaded with him, “Send us into the swine. Let us enter them.” 
    13: And he let them, and the unclean spirits came out and entered the swine. The herd of about two thousand rushed down a steep bank into the sea, where they were drowned. 
    14: The swineherds ran away and reported the incident in the town and throughout the countryside. And people came out to see what had happened. 
    15: As they approached Jesus, they caught sight of the man who had been possessed by Legion, sitting there clothed and in his right mind. And they were seized with fear. 
    16: Those who witnessed the incident explained to them what had happened to the possessed man and to the swine. 
    17: Then they began to beg him to leave their district. 
    18: As he was getting into the boat, the man who had been possessed pleaded to remain with him. 
    19: But he would not permit him but told him instead, “Go home to your family and announce to them all that the Lord in his pity has done for you.” 
    20: Then the man went off and began to proclaim in the Decapolis what Jesus had done for him; and all were amazed.
Jairus’s Daughter and the Woman with a Hemorrhage. 
    21: When Jesus had crossed again  to the other side, a large crowd gathered around him, and he stayed close to the sea. 
    22: One of the synagogue officials, named Jairus, came forward. Seeing him he fell at his feet 
    23: and pleaded earnestly with him, saying, “My daughter is at the point of death. Please, come lay your hands on her that she may get well and live.” 
    24: He went off with him, and a large crowd followed him and pressed upon him.

    25: There was a woman afflicted with hemorrhages for twelve years. 
    26: She had suffered greatly at the hands of many doctors and had spent all that she had. Yet she was not helped but only grew worse. 
    27: She had heard about Jesus and came up behind him in the crowd and touched his cloak. 
    28: She said, “If I but touch his clothes, I shall be cured.” 
    29: Immediately her flow of blood dried up. She felt in her body that she was healed of her affliction. 
    30: Jesus, aware at once that power had gone out from him, turned around in the crowd and asked, “Who has touched my clothes?” 
    31: But his disciples said to him, “You see how the crowd is pressing upon you, and yet you ask, ‘Who touched me?’” 
    32: And he looked around to see who had done it. 
    33: The woman, realizing what had happened to her, approached in fear and trembling. She fell down before Jesus and told him the whole truth. 
    34: He said to her, “Daughter, your faith has saved you. Go in peace and be cured of your affliction.”

    35: While he was still speaking, people from the synagogue official’s house arrived and said, “Your daughter has died; why trouble the teacher any longer?” 
    36: Disregarding the message that was reported, Jesus said to the synagogue official, “Do not be afraid; just have faith.” 
    37: He did not allow anyone to accompany him inside except Peter, James, and John, the brother of James. 
    38: When they arrived at the house of the synagogue official, he caught sight of a commotion, people weeping and wailing loudly. 
    39: So he went in and said to them, “Why this commotion and weeping? The child is not dead but asleep.” 
    40: And they ridiculed him. Then he put them all out. He took along the child’s father and mother and those who were with him and entered the room where the child was. 
    41: He took the child by the hand and said to her, “Talitha koum,” which means, “Little girl, I say to you, arise!” 
    42: The girl, a child of twelve, arose immediately and walked around.  they were utterly astounded. 
    43: He gave strict orders that no one should know this and said that she should be given something to eat.


  Chapter 6.

    1: He departed from there and came to his native place, accompanied by his disciples. 
    2: When the sabbath came he began to teach in the synagogue, and many who heard him were astonished. They said, “Where did this man get all this? What kind of wisdom has been given him? What mighty deeds are wrought by his hands! 
    3: Is he not the carpenter, the son of Mary, and the brother of James and Joses and Judas and Simon? And are not his sisters here with us?” And they took offense at him. 
    4: Jesus said to them, “A prophet is not without honor except in his native place and among his own kin and in his own house.” 
    5: 
    6: The Rejection at Nazareth. 1 He departed from there and came to his native place, accompanied by his disciples. 2 [b]When the sabbath came he began to teach in the synagogue, and many who heard him were astonished. They said, “Where did this man get all this? What kind of wisdom has been given him? What mighty deeds are wrought by his hands! 3 Is he not the carpenter,[c] the son of Mary, and the brother of James and Joses and Judas and Simon? And are not his sisters here with us?” And they took offense at him. 4 [d]Jesus said to them, “A prophet is not without honor except in his native place and among his own kin and in his own house.” 5 So he was not able to perform any mighty deed there,[e] apart from curing a few sick people by laying his hands on them. 6 He was amazed at their lack of faith.
The Mission of the Twelve. He went around to the villages in the vicinity teaching. 
    7: He summoned the Twelve and began to send them out two by two and gave them authority over unclean spirits. 
    8: He instructed them to take nothing for the journey but a walking stick—no food, no sack, no money in their belts. 
    9: hey were, however, to wear sandals but not a second tunic. 
    10: He said to them, “Wherever you enter a house, stay there until you leave from there. 
    11: Whatever place does not welcome you or listen to you, leave there and shake the dust off your feet in testimony against them.” 
    12: So they went off and preached repentance. 
    13: They drove out many demons, and they anointed with oil many who were sick and cured them.
Herod’s Opinion of Jesus.[j] 
    14: King Herod heard about it, for his fame had become widespread, and people were saying, “John the Baptist has been raised from the dead; that is why mighty powers are at work in him.” 
    15: Others were saying, “He is Elijah”; still others, “He is a prophet like any of the prophets.” 
    16: But when Herod learned of it, he said, “It is John whom I beheaded. He has been raised up.”
The Death of John the Baptist. 
    17: Herod was the one who had John arrested and bound in prison on account of Herodias, the wife of his brother Philip, whom he had married. 
    18: John had said to Herod, “It is not lawful for you to have your brother’s wife.” 
    19: Herodias harbored a grudge against him and wanted to kill him but was unable to do so. 
    20: Herod feared John, knowing him to be a righteous and holy man, and kept him in custody. When he heard him speak he was very much perplexed, yet he liked to listen to him. 
    21: She had an opportunity one day when Herod, on his birthday, gave a banquet for his courtiers, his military officers, and the leading men of Galilee. 
    22: Herodias’s own daughter came in and performed a dance that delighted Herod and his guests. The king said to the girl, “Ask of me whatever you wish and I will grant it to you.” 
    23: He even swore  to her, “I will grant you whatever you ask of me, even to half of my kingdom.” 
    24: She went out and said to her mother, “What shall I ask for?” She replied, “The head of John the Baptist.” 
    25: The girl hurried back to the king’s presence and made her request, “I want you to give me at once on a platter the head of John the Baptist.” 
    26: The king was deeply distressed, but because of his oaths and the guests he did not wish to break his word to her. 
    27: So he promptly dispatched an executioner with orders to bring back his head. He went off and beheaded him in the prison. 
    28: He brought in the head on a platter and gave it to the girl. The girl in turn gave it to her mother. 
    29: When his disciples heard about it, they came and took his body and laid it in a tomb.
The Return of the Twelve. 
    30: The apostles gathered together with Jesus and reported all they had done and taught. 
    31: He said to them, “Come away by yourselves to a deserted place and rest a while.” People were coming and going in great numbers, and they had no opportunity even to eat. 
    32: So they went off in the boat by themselves to a deserted place. 
    33: People saw them leaving and many came to know about it. They hastened there on foot from all the towns and arrived at the place before them.
The Feeding of the Five Thousand. 
    34: When he disembarked and saw the vast crowd, his heart was moved with pity for them, for they were like sheep without a shepherd; and he began to teach them many things. 
    35: By now it was already late and his disciples approached him and said, “This is a deserted place and it is already very late. 
    36: Dismiss them so that they can go to the surrounding farms and villages and buy themselves something to eat.” 
    37: He said to them in reply, “Give them some food yourselves.” But they said to him, “Are we to buy two hundred days’ wages worth of food and give it to them to eat?” 
    38: He asked them, “How many loaves do you have? Go and see.” And when they had found out they said, “Five loaves and two fish.” 
    39: So he gave orders to have them sit down in groups on the green grass. 
    40: The people took their places in rows by hundreds and by fifties. 
    41: Then, taking the five loaves and the two fish and looking up to heaven, he said the blessing, broke the loaves, and gave them to  disciples to set before the people; he also divided the two fish among them all.[r] 
    42: They all ate and were satisfied. 
    43: And they picked up twelve wicker baskets full of fragments and what was left of the fish. 
    44: Those who ate  were five thousand men.
The Walking on the Water.[s] 
    45: Then he made his disciples get into the boat and precede him to the other side toward Bethsaida, while he dismissed the crowd. 
    46: And when he had taken leave of them, he went off to the mountain to pray. 
    47: When it was evening, the boat was far out on the sea and he was alone on shore. 
    48: Then he saw that they were tossed about while rowing, for the wind was against them. About the fourth watch of the night, he came toward them walking on the sea. He meant to pass by them. 
    49: But when they saw him walking on the sea, they thought it was a ghost and cried out. 
    50: They had all seen him and were terrified. But at once he spoke with them, “Take courage, it is I, do not be afraid!” 
    51: He got into the boat with them and the wind died down. They were  astounded. 
    52: They had not understood the incident of the loaves. On the contrary, their hearts were hardened.
The Healings at Gennesaret. 
    53: After making the crossing, they came to land at Gennesaret and tied up there. 
    54: As they were leaving the boat, people immediately recognized him. 
    55: They scurried about the surrounding country and began to bring in the sick on mats to wherever they heard he was. 
    56: Whatever villages or towns or countryside he entered, they laid the sick in the marketplaces and begged him that they might touch only the tassel on his cloak; and as many as touched it were healed.


  Chapter 7.

    1: Now when the Pharisees with some scribes who had come from Jerusalem gathered around him, 
    2: they observed that some of his disciples ate their meals with unclean, that is, unwashed, hands. 
    3: (For the Pharisees and, in fact, all Jews, do not eat without carefully washing their hands, keeping the tradition of the elders. 
    4: And on coming from the marketplace they do not eat without purifying themselves. And there are many other things that they have traditionally observed, the purification of cups and jugs and kettles .) 
    5: So the Pharisees and scribes questioned him, “Why do your disciples not follow the tradition of the elders but instead eat a meal with unclean hands?” 
    6: 
    7: The Tradition of the Elders. 1 Now when the Pharisees with some scribes who had come from Jerusalem gathered around him, 2 they observed that some of his disciples ate their meals with unclean, that is, unwashed, hands. 3 (For the Pharisees and, in fact, all Jews, do not eat without carefully washing their hands,[b] keeping the tradition of the elders. 4 And on coming from the marketplace they do not eat without purifying themselves. And there are many other things that they have traditionally observed, the purification of cups and jugs and kettles [and beds].) 5 So the Pharisees and scribes questioned him, “Why do your disciples not follow the tradition of the elders[c] but instead eat a meal with unclean hands?” 6 He responded, “Well did Isaiah prophesy about you hypocrites, as it is written:
‘This people honors me with their lips,
    but their hearts are far from me;
7 
In vain do they worship me,
    teaching as doctrines human precepts.’

    8: You disregard God’s commandment but cling to human tradition.” 
    9: e went on to say, “How well you have set aside the commandment of God in order to uphold your tradition! 
    10: For Moses said, ‘Honor your father and your mother,’ and ‘Whoever curses father or mother shall die.’ 
    11: Yet you say, ‘If a person says to father or mother, “Any support you might have had from me is qorban”’ (meaning, dedicated to God), 
    12: you allow him to do nothing more for his father or mother. 
    13: You nullify the word of God in favor of your tradition that you have handed on. And you do many such things.” 
    14: He summoned the crowd again and said to them, “Hear me, all of you, and understand. 
    15: Nothing that enters one from outside can defile that person; but the things that come out from within are what defile.” 
    16: ][e]

    17: When he got home away from the crowd his disciples questioned him about the parable. 
    18: He said to them, “Are even you likewise without understanding? Do you not realize that everything that goes into a person from outside cannot defile, 
    19: since it enters not the heart but the stomach and passes out into the latrine?” (Thus he declared all foods clean.) 
    20: “But what comes out of a person, that is what defiles. 
    21: From within people, from their hearts, come evil thoughts, unchastity, theft, murder, 
    22: adultery, greed, malice, deceit, licentiousness, envy, blasphemy, arrogance, folly. 
    23: All these evils come from within and they defile.”
The Syrophoenician Woman’s Faith. 
    24: From that place he went off to the district of Tyre. He entered a house and wanted no one to know about it, but he could not escape notice. 
    25: Soon a woman whose daughter had an unclean spirit heard about him. She came and fell at his feet. 
    26: The woman was a Greek, a Syrophoenician by birth, and she begged him to drive the demon out of her daughter. 
    27: He said to her, “Let the children be fed first. For it is not right to take the food of the children and throw it to the dogs.” 
    28: She replied and said to him, “Lord, even the dogs under the table eat the children’s scraps.” 
    29: Then he said to her, “For saying this, you may go. The demon has gone out of your daughter.” 
    30: When the woman went home, she found the child lying in bed and the demon gone.
The Healing of a Deaf Man. 
    31: Again he left the district of Tyre and went by way of Sidon to the Sea of Galilee, into the district of the Decapolis. 
    32: And people brought to him a deaf man who had a speech impediment and begged him to lay his hand on him. 
    33: He took him off by himself away from the crowd. He put his finger into the man’s ears and, spitting, touched his tongue; 
    34: then he looked up to heaven and groaned, and said to him, “Ephphatha!” (that is, “Be opened!”) 
    35: And  the man’s ears were opened, his speech impediment was removed, and he spoke plainly. 
    36: He ordered them not to tell anyone. But the more he ordered them not to, the more they proclaimed it. 
    37: They were exceedingly astonished and they said, “He has done all things well. He makes the deaf hear and  mute speak.”


  Chapter 8.

    1: In those days when there again was a great crowd without anything to eat, he summoned the disciples and said, 
    2: “My heart is moved with pity for the crowd, because they have been with me now for three days and have nothing to eat. 
    3: If I send them away hungry to their homes, they will collapse on the way, and some of them have come a great distance.” 
    4: His disciples answered him, “Where can anyone get enough bread to satisfy them here in this deserted place?” 
    5: Still he asked them, “How many loaves do you have?” “Seven,” they replied. 
    6: He ordered the crowd to sit down on the ground. Then, taking the seven loaves he gave thanks, broke them, and gave them to his disciples to distribute, and they distributed them to the crowd. 
    7: 
    8: The Feeding of the Four Thousand. 1 In those days when there again was a great crowd without anything to eat, he summoned the disciples and said, 2 “My heart is moved with pity for the crowd, because they have been with me now for three days and have nothing to eat. 3 If I send them away hungry to their homes, they will collapse on the way, and some of them have come a great distance.” 4 His disciples answered him, “Where can anyone get enough bread to satisfy them here in this deserted place?” 5 Still he asked them, “How many loaves do you have?” “Seven,” they replied. 6 [b]He ordered the crowd to sit down on the ground. Then, taking the seven loaves he gave thanks, broke them, and gave them to his disciples to distribute, and they distributed them to the crowd. 7 They also had a few fish. He said the blessing over them and ordered them distributed also. 8 They ate and were satisfied. They picked up the fragments left over—seven baskets. 
    9: here were about four thousand people.
He dismissed them 
    10: and got into the boat with his disciples and came to the region of Dalmanutha.
The Demand for a Sign. 
    11: The Pharisees came forward and began to argue with him, seeking from him a sign from heaven to test him. 
    12: He sighed from the depth of his spirit and said, “Why does this generation seek a sign? Amen, I say to you, no sign will be given to this generation.” 
    13: Then he left them, got into the boat again, and went off to the other shore.
The Leaven of the Pharisees. 
    14: They had forgotten to bring bread, and they had only one loaf with them in the boat. 
    15: He enjoined them, “Watch out, guard against the leaven of the Pharisees and the leaven of Herod.” 
    16: They concluded among themselves that it was because they had no bread. 
    17: When he became aware of this he said to them, “Why do you conclude that it is because you have no bread? Do you not yet understand or comprehend? Are your hearts hardened? 
    18: Do you have eyes and not see, ears and not hear? And do you not remember, 
    19: when I broke the five loaves for the five thousand, how many wicker baskets full of fragments you picked up?” They answered him, “Twelve.” 
    20: “When I broke the seven loaves for the four thousand, how many full baskets of fragments did you pick up?” They answered , “Seven.” 
    21: He said to them, “Do you still not understand?”
The Blind Man of Bethsaida. 
    22: When they arrived at Bethsaida, they brought to him a blind man and begged him to touch him. 
    23: He took the blind man by the hand and led him outside the village. Putting spittle on his eyes he laid his hands on him and asked, “Do you see anything?” 
    24: Looking up he replied, “I see people looking like trees and walking.” 
    25: Then he laid hands on his eyes a second time and he saw clearly; his sight was restored and he could see everything distinctly. 
    26: Then he sent him home and said, “Do not even go into the village.”
III. The Mystery Begins to Be Revealed
Peter’s Confession About Jesus. 
    27: Now Jesus and his disciples set out for the villages of Caesarea Philippi. Along the way he asked his disciples, “Who do people say that I am?” 
    28: They said in reply, “John the Baptist, others Elijah, still others one of the prophets.” 
    29: And he asked them, “But who do you say that I am?” Peter said to him in reply, “You are the Messiah.” 
    30: Then he warned them not to tell anyone about him.
The First Prediction of the Passion. 
    31: He began to teach them that the Son of Man must suffer greatly and be rejected by the elders, the chief priests, and the scribes, and be killed, and rise after three days. 
    32: He spoke this openly. Then Peter took him aside and began to rebuke him. 
    33: At this he turned around and, looking at his disciples, rebuked Peter and said, “Get behind me, Satan. You are thinking not as God does, but as human beings do.”
The Conditions of Discipleship. 
    34: He summoned the crowd with his disciples and said to them, “Whoever wishes to come after me must deny himself, take up his cross, and follow me. 
    35: For whoever wishes to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for my sake and that of the gospel will save it. 
    36: What profit is there for one to gain the whole world and forfeit his life? 
    37: What could one give in exchange for his life? 
    38: Whoever is ashamed of me and of my words in this faithless and sinful generation, the Son of Man will be ashamed of when he comes in his Father’s glory with the holy angels.”


End of day 291.