Day 48:

Reading Deuteronomy, chapters ['33', '34']:

  Chapter 33.

    1: This is the blessing with which Moses, the man of God, blessed the Israelites before he died.

    2: 
    3: 
Blessing upon the Tribes. 1 This is the blessing with which Moses, the man of God, blessed the Israelites before he died.
2 He said:
The Lord came from Sinai
    and dawned on his people from Seir;
    he shone forth from Mount Paran.
With him were myriads of holy ones;
    at his right hand advanced the gods.[b]
3 
Indeed, lover of the peoples,
    all the holy ones are at your side;
They follow at your heels,
    carry out your decisions.

    4: 
Moses charged us with the law,
    as a possession for the assembly of Jacob.

    5: 
A king arose in Jeshurun
    when the chiefs of the people assembled,
    and the tribes of Israel united.

    6: 
May Reuben live and not die out,
    but let his numbers be few.

    7: Of Judah he said this:
Hear, Lord, the voice of Judah,
    and bring him to his people.
His own hands defend his cause;
    be a help against his foes.

    8: Of Levi he said:
Give to Levi your Thummim,
    your Urim to your faithful one;
Him you tested at Massah,
    contended against him at the waters of Meribah.

    9: He said of his father and mother,
    “I have no regard for them”;
His brothers he would not acknowledge,
    and his own children he did not recognize.
For they kept your words,
    and your covenant they upheld.

    10: 
They teach your ordinances to Jacob,
    your law to Israel.
They bring incense to your nostrils,
    and burnt offerings to your altar.

    11: 
Bless, Lord, his strength,
    be pleased with the work of his hands.
Crush the loins of his adversaries
    and of his foes, that they may not rise.

    12: Of Benjamin he said:
The beloved of the Lord,
    he abides in safety beside him;
He shelters him all day long;
    the beloved abides at his breast.

    13: Of Joseph he said:
Blessed by the Lord is his land
    with the best of heaven above
    and of the abyss crouching beneath;

    14: 
With the best of the produce of the sun,
    and the choicest yield of the months;

    15: 
With the finest gifts of the ancient mountains
    and the best from the everlasting hills;

    16: 
With the best of the earth and its fullness,
    and the favor of the one who dwells on Sinai.
Let these come upon the head of Joseph
    and upon the brow of the prince among his brothers.

    17: 
His firstborn bull, majesty is his!
    His horns are the horns of a wild ox;
With them he gores the peoples,
    attacks the ends of the earth.
These are the myriads of Ephraim,
    and these the thousands of Manasseh.

    18: Of Zebulun he said:
Rejoice, Zebulun, in your expeditions,
    exult, Issachar, in your tents!

    19: 
They invite peoples to the mountain
    where they offer right sacrifices,
Because they suck up the abundance of the seas
    and the hidden treasures of the sand.

    20: Of Gad he said:
Blessed be the one who has made Gad so vast!
    He lies there like a lion;
    he tears the arm, the head as well.

    21: 
He saw that the best should be his,
    for there the commander’s portion was assigned;
    he came at the head of the people.
He carried out the justice of the Lord
    and his ordinances for Israel.

    22: Of Dan he said:
Dan is a lion’s cub,
    that springs away from a viper!

    23: Of Naphtali he said:
Naphtali, abounding with favor,
    filled with the blessing of the Lord,
    take possession of the west and south.

    24: Of Asher he said:
Most blessed of sons be Asher!
    May he be the favorite among his brothers,
    and may he dip his foot in oil!

    25: 
May the bolts of your gates be iron and bronze;
    may your strength endure through all your days!

    26: 
There is none like the God of Jeshurun,
    who rides the heavens in his power,
    who rides the clouds in his majesty;

    27: 
The God of old is a refuge;
    a support are the arms of the Everlasting.
He drove the enemy out of your way
    and he said, “Destroy!”

    28: 
Israel abides securely,
    Jacob dwells apart,
In a land of grain and wine,
    where the heavens drip with dew.

    29: 
Happy are you, Israel! Who is like you,
    a people delivered by the Lord,
Your help and shield,
    and the sword of your glory.
Your enemies cringe before you;
    you stride upon their backs.


  Chapter 34.

    1: Then Moses went up from the plains of Moab to Mount Nebo, the peak of Pisgah which faces Jericho, and the Lord showed him all the land—Gilead, and as far as Dan, 
    2: 
    3: 
    4: 1 Then Moses went up from the plains of Moab to Mount Nebo, the peak of Pisgah which faces Jericho, and the Lord showed him all the land—Gilead, and as far as Dan, 2 all Naphtali, the land of Ephraim and Manasseh, all the land of Judah as far as the Western Sea, 3 the Negeb, the plain (the valley of Jericho, the City of Palms), and as far as Zoar. 4 The Lord then said to him, This is the land about which I promised on oath to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, “I will give it to your descendants.” I have let you see it with your own eyes, but you shall not cross over. 
    5: So there, in the land of Moab, Moses, the servant of the Lord, died as the Lord had said; 
    6: and he was buried in a valley in the land of Moab, opposite Beth-peor; to this day no one knows the place of his burial. 
    7: Moses was one hundred and twenty years old when he died, yet his eyes were undimmed and his vigor unabated. 
    8: The Israelites wept for Moses in the plains of Moab for thirty days, till they had completed the period of grief and mourning for Moses.

    9: ow Joshua, son of Nun, was filled with the spirit of wisdom, since Moses had laid his hands upon him; and so the Israelites gave him their obedience, just as the Lord had commanded Moses.

    10: Since then no prophet has arisen in Israel like Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face, 
    11: in all the signs and wonders the Lord sent him to perform in the land of Egypt against Pharaoh and all his servants and against all his land, 
    12: and all the great might and the awesome power that Moses displayed in the sight of all Israel.
New American Bible (Revised Edition) (NABRE)
Scripture texts, prefaces, introductions, footnotes and cross references used in this work are taken from the New American Bible, revised edition © 2010, 1991, 1986, 1970 Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, DC All Rights Reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the copyright owner.

End of day 48.