Day 71:

Reading 2-Samuel, chapters ['5', '6', '7', '8']:

  Chapter 5.

    1: All the tribes of Israel came to David in Hebron, and they said: “Look! We are your bone and your flesh. 
    2: In days past, when Saul was still our king, you were the one who led Israel out in all its battles and brought it back. And the Lord said to you: You shall shepherd my people Israel; you shall be ruler over Israel.” 
    3: Then all the elders of Israel came to the king in Hebron, and at Hebron King David made a covenant with them in the presence of the Lord; and they anointed David king over Israel. 
    4: 
    5: David King of Israel. 1 All the tribes of Israel came to David in Hebron, and they said: “Look! We are your bone and your flesh. 2 In days past, when Saul was still our king, you were the one who led Israel out in all its battles and brought it back. And the Lord said to you: You shall shepherd my people Israel; you shall be ruler over Israel.” 3 Then all the elders of Israel came to the king in Hebron, and at Hebron King David made a covenant with them in the presence of the Lord; and they anointed David king over Israel. 4 David was thirty years old when he became king, and he reigned forty years: 5 in Hebron he was king over Judah seven years and six months, and in Jerusalem he was king thirty-three years over all Israel and Judah.
Capture of Zion. 
    6: Then the king and his men went to Jerusalem against the Jebusites who inhabited the land. They told David, “You shall not enter here: the blind and the lame will drive you away!” which was their way of saying, “David shall not enter here.” 
    7: David nevertheless captured the fortress of Zion, which is the City of David. 
    8: On that day David said: “All who wish to strike at the Jebusites must attack through the water shaft. The lame and the blind shall be the personal enemies of David.” That is why it is said, “The blind and the lame shall not enter the palace.” 
    9: avid took up residence in the fortress which he called the City of David. David built up the city on all sides, from the Millo toward the center. 
    10: David became ever more powerful, for the Lord of hosts was with him. 
    11: Hiram, king of Tyre, sent envoys to David along with cedar wood, and carpenters and masons, who built a house for David. 
    12: David now knew that the Lord had truly established him as king over Israel and had exalted his kingdom for the sake of his people Israel.
David’s Family in Jerusalem. 
    13: David took more concubines and wives in Jerusalem after he had come from Hebron, and more sons and daughters were born to him. 
    14: These are the names of those who were born to him in Jerusalem: Shammua, Shobab, Nathan, Solomon, 
    15: Ibhar, Elishua, Nepheg, Japhia, 
    16: Elishama, Beeliada, and Eliphelet.
Rout of the Philistines. 
    17: When the Philistines had heard that David was anointed king over Israel, they marched out in force to come after him. When David heard this, he went down to the refuge. 
    18: Meanwhile the Philistines had come and deployed themselves in the valley of Rephaim. 
    19: David inquired of the Lord, “Shall I attack the Philistines, and will you deliver them into my power?” The Lord answered David: Attack, for I will surely deliver the Philistines into your power. 
    20: So David went to Baal-perazim, and he defeated them there. He said, “The Lord has broken through my enemies before me just as water breaks through a dam.” Therefore that place was called Baal-perazim. 
    21: The Philistines abandoned their gods there, and David and his men carried them away. 
    22: Once again the Philistines came up and deployed themselves in the valley of Rephaim, 
    23: and again David inquired of the Lord, who replied: Do not attack the front—circle behind them and come against them near the balsam trees. 
    24: When you hear the sound of marching in the tops of the balsam trees, act decisively, for then the Lord has already gone before you to strike the army of the Philistines. 
    25: David did as the Lord commanded him, and routed the Philistines from Gibeon as far as Gezer.


  Chapter 6.

    1: David again assembled all the picked men of Israel, thirty thousand in number. 
    2: Then David and all the people who were with him set out for Baala of Judah to bring up from there the ark of God, which bears the name “the Lord of hosts enthroned above the cherubim.” 
    3: They transported the ark of God on a new cart and took it away from the house of Abinadab on the hill. Uzzah and Ahio, sons of Abinadab, were guiding the cart, 
    4: with Ahio walking before it, 
    5: 
    6: The Ark Brought to Jerusalem. 1 David again assembled all the picked men of Israel, thirty thousand in number. 2 Then David and all the people who were with him set out for Baala of Judah to bring up from there the ark of God, which bears the name “the Lord of hosts enthroned above the cherubim.” 3 They transported the ark of God on a new cart and took it away from the house of Abinadab on the hill. Uzzah and Ahio, sons of Abinadab, were guiding the cart, 4 with Ahio walking before it, 5 while David and all the house of Israel danced before the Lord with all their might, with singing, and with lyres, harps, tambourines, sistrums, and cymbals. 6 As they reached the threshing floor of Nodan, Uzzah stretched out his hand to the ark of God and steadied it, for the oxen were tipping it. 
    7: Then the Lord became angry with Uzzah; God struck him on that spot, and he died there in God’s presence. 
    8: David was angry because the Lord’s wrath had broken out against Uzzah. Therefore that place has been called Perez-uzzah even to this day. 
    9: avid became frightened of the Lord that day, and he said, “How can the ark of the Lord come to me?” 
    10: So David was unwilling to take the ark of the Lord with him into the City of David. David deposited it instead at the house of Obed-edom the Gittite.

    11: The ark of the Lord remained in the house of Obed-edom the Gittite for three months, and the Lord blessed Obed-edom and all his household. 
    12: When it was reported to King David that the Lord had blessed the household of Obed-edom and all that he possessed because of the ark of God, David went to bring up the ark of God from the house of Obed-edom into the City of David with joy. 
    13: As soon as the bearers of the ark of the Lord had advanced six steps, he sacrificed an ox and a fatling. 
    14: Then David came dancing before the Lord with abandon, girt with a linen ephod. 
    15: David and all the house of Israel were bringing up the ark of the Lord with shouts of joy and sound of horn. 
    16: As the ark of the Lord was entering the City of David, Michal, daughter of Saul, looked down from her window, and when she saw King David jumping and dancing before the Lord, she despised him in her heart. 
    17: They brought in the ark of the Lord and set it in its place within the tent which David had pitched for it. Then David sacrificed burnt offerings and communion offerings before the Lord. 
    18: When David had finished sacrificing burnt offerings and communion offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the Lord of hosts, 
    19: and distributed among all the people, the entire multitude of Israel, to every man and every woman, one loaf of bread, one piece of meat, and one raisin cake. Then all the people returned to their homes.

    20: When David went home to bless his own house, Michal, the daughter of Saul, came out to meet him and said, “How well the king of Israel has honored himself today, exposing himself to the view of the slave girls of his followers, as a commoner might expose himself!” 
    21: But David replied to Michal: “I was dancing before the Lord. As the Lord lives, who chose me over your father and all his house when he appointed me ruler over the Lord’s people, Israel, not only will I make merry before the Lord, 
    22: but I will demean myself even more. I will be lowly in your eyes, but in the eyes of the slave girls you spoke of I will be somebody.” 
    23: Saul’s daughter Michal was childless to the day she died.


  Chapter 7.

    1: After the king had taken up residence in his house, and the Lord had given him rest from his enemies on every side, 
    2: the king said to Nathan the prophet, “Here I am living in a house of cedar, but the ark of God dwells in a tent!” 
    3: Nathan answered the king, “Whatever is in your heart, go and do, for the Lord is with you.” 
    4: But that same night the word of the Lord came to Nathan: 
    5: Go and tell David my servant, Thus says the Lord: Is it you who would build me a house to dwell in? 
    6: 
    7: The Oracle of Nathan. 1 After the king had taken up residence in his house, and the Lord had given him rest from his enemies on every side, 2 the king said to Nathan the prophet, “Here I am living in a house of cedar, but the ark of God dwells in a tent!” 3 Nathan answered the king, “Whatever is in your heart, go and do, for the Lord is with you.” 4 But that same night the word of the Lord came to Nathan: 5 Go and tell David my servant, Thus says the Lord: Is it you who would build me a house to dwell in? 6 I have never dwelt in a house from the day I brought Israel up from Egypt to this day, but I have been going about in a tent or a tabernacle. 7 As long as I have wandered about among the Israelites, did I ever say a word to any of the judges whom I commanded to shepherd my people Israel: Why have you not built me a house of cedar?

    8: Now then, speak thus to my servant David, Thus says the Lord of hosts: I took you from the pasture, from following the flock, to become ruler over my people Israel. 
    9:  was with you wherever you went, and I cut down all your enemies before you. And I will make your name like that of the greatest on earth. 
    10: I will assign a place for my people Israel and I will plant them in it to dwell there; they will never again be disturbed, nor shall the wicked ever again oppress them, as they did at the beginning, 
    11: and from the day when I appointed judges over my people Israel. I will give you rest from all your enemies. Moreover, the Lord also declares to you that the Lord will make a house for you: 
    12: when your days have been completed and you rest with your ancestors, I will raise up your offspring after you, sprung from your loins, and I will establish his kingdom. 
    13: He it is who shall build a house for my name, and I will establish his royal throne forever. 
    14: I will be a father to him, and he shall be a son to me. If he does wrong, I will reprove him with a human rod and with human punishments; 
    15: but I will not withdraw my favor from him as I withdrew it from Saul who was before you. 
    16: Your house and your kingdom are firm forever before me; your throne shall be firmly established forever. 
    17: In accordance with all these words and this whole vision Nathan spoke to David.
David’s Thanksgiving. 
    18: Then King David went in and sat in the Lord’s presence and said, “Who am I, Lord God, and what is my house, that you should have brought me so far? 
    19: And yet even this is too little in your sight, Lord God! For you have made a promise regarding your servant’s house reaching into the future, and giving guidance to the people, Lord God! 
    20: What more can David say to you? You know your servant, Lord God! 
    21: For your servant’s sake and as you have had at heart, you have brought about this whole magnificent disclosure to your servant. 
    22: Therefore, great are you, Lord God! There is no one like you, no God but you, as we have always heard. 
    23: What other nation on earth is there like your people Israel? What god has ever led a nation, redeeming it as his people and making a name by great and awesome deeds, as you drove out the nations and their gods before your people, whom you redeemed for yourself from Egypt? 
    24: You have established for yourself your people Israel as your people forever, and you, Lord, have become their God. 
    25: Now, Lord God, confirm the promise that you have spoken concerning your servant and his house forever. Bring about what you have promised 
    26: so that your name may be forever great. People will say: ‘The Lord of hosts is God over Israel,’ when the house of your servant David is established in your presence. 
    27: Because you, Lord of hosts, God of Israel, have revealed to your servant, ‘I will build you a house,’ your servant now finds the courage to make this prayer before you. 
    28: Since you, Lord God, are truly God and your words are truth and you have made this generous promise to your servant, 
    29: do, then, bless the house of your servant, that it may be in your presence forever—since you, Lord God, have promised, and by your blessing the house of your servant shall be blessed forever.”


  Chapter 8.

    1: After this, David defeated the Philistines and subdued them; and David took… from the Philistines. 
    2: He also defeated Moab and measured them with a line. Making them lie down on the ground, he measured two lengths of line for death, and a full length for life. Thus the Moabites became subject to David, paying tribute. 
    3: David then defeated Hadadezer, son of Rehob, king of Zobah, when he went to re-establish his dominion at the River. 
    4: David captured from him one thousand seven hundred horsemen and twenty thousand foot soldiers. David hamstrung all the chariot horses, but left one hundred for his chariots. 
    5: The Arameans of Damascus came to help Hadadezer, king of Zobah, but David also defeated twenty-two thousand of them in Aram. 
    6: David then placed garrisons in the Damascus region of Aram, and the Arameans became David’s subjects, paying tribute. The Lord brought David victory in all his undertakings. 
    7: 
    8: Summary of David’s Wars. 1 After this, David defeated the Philistines and subdued them; and David took… from the Philistines. 2 He also defeated Moab and measured them with a line. Making them lie down on the ground, he measured two lengths of line for death, and a full length for life.[b] Thus the Moabites became subject to David, paying tribute. 3 David then defeated Hadadezer, son of Rehob, king of Zobah, when he went to re-establish his dominion at the River. 4 David captured from him one thousand seven hundred horsemen and twenty thousand foot soldiers. David hamstrung all the chariot horses, but left one hundred for his chariots. 5 The Arameans of Damascus came to help Hadadezer, king of Zobah, but David also defeated twenty-two thousand of them in Aram. 6 David then placed garrisons in the Damascus region of Aram, and the Arameans became David’s subjects, paying tribute. The Lord brought David victory in all his undertakings. 7 David took the golden shields that were carried by Hadadezer’s attendants and brought them to Jerusalem. (These Shishak, king of Egypt, took away when he came to Jerusalem in the days of Rehoboam, son of Solomon.) 8 From Tebah and Berothai, cities of Hadadezer, King David removed a very large quantity of bronze. 
    9: hen Toi, king of Hamath, heard that David had defeated the entire army of Hadadezer, 
    10: Toi sent his son Hadoram to wish King David well and to congratulate him on having waged a victorious war against Hadadezer; for Hadadezer had been at war with Toi. Hadoram also brought with him articles of silver, gold, and bronze. 
    11: These also King David consecrated to the Lord along with the silver and gold that he had taken for this purpose from all the nations he had subdued: 
    12: from Edom, Moab, the Ammonites, the Philistines, and Amalek, and from the spoils of Hadadezer, son of Rehob, king of Zobah.

    13: On his return, David made a name for himself by defeating eighteen thousand Edomites in the Valley of Salt. 
    14: He set up garrisons in Edom, and all the Edomites became David’s subjects. Thus the Lord brought David victory in all his undertakings.
David’s Officials. 
    15: David was king over all Israel; he dispensed justice and right to all his people. 
    16: Joab, son of Zeruiah, was in command of the army. Jehoshaphat, son of Ahilud, was chancellor. 
    17: Zadok, son of Ahitub, and Ahimelech, son of Abiathar, were priests. Shavsha was scribe. 
    18: Benaiah, son of Jehoiada, was in command of the Cherethites and the Pelethites; and David’s sons were priests.


End of day 71.