Day 79:

Reading 1-Kings, chapters ['13', '14', '15', '16']:

  Chapter 13.

    1: 
1 A man of God came from Judah to Bethel by the word of the Lord, while Jeroboam was standing at the altar to burn incense. 
    2: 
    3: 1 A man of God came from Judah to Bethel by the word of the Lord, while Jeroboam was standing at the altar to burn incense. 2 He cried out against the altar by the word of the Lord: “Altar, altar, thus says the Lord: A child shall be born to the house of David, Josiah by name, who shall slaughter upon you the priests of the high places who burn incense upon you, and they shall burn human bones upon you.” 3 He also gave a sign that same day and said: “This is the sign that the Lord has spoken: The altar shall be torn apart and the ashes on it shall be scattered.” 
    4: When the king heard the word of the man of God which he was crying out against the altar in Bethel, Jeroboam stretched forth his hand from the altar and said, “Seize him!” But the hand he stretched forth against him withered, so that he could not draw it back. 
    5: (The altar was torn apart and the ashes from the altar were scattered, in accordance with the sign the man of God gave by the word of the Lord.)

    6: Then the king said to the man of God, “Entreat the Lord, your God, and intercede for me that my hand may be restored.” So the man of God entreated the Lord, and the king’s hand was restored as it was before. 
    7: The king told the man of God, “Come with me to the house for some refreshment so that I may give you a present.” 
    8: The man of God said to the king, “If you gave me half your palace, I would not go with you, nor eat bread or drink water in this place. 
    9: or I was instructed by the word of the Lord: Do not eat bread or drink water, and do not return by the way you came.” 
    10: So he departed by another road and did not go back the way he had come to Bethel.
Prophetic Disunity. 
    11: There was an old prophet living in Bethel, whose son came and told him all that the man of God had done that day in Bethel. When his sons repeated to their father the words the man of God had spoken to the king, 
    12: 
    13: 1 A man of God came from Judah to Bethel by the word of the Lord, while Jeroboam was standing at the altar to burn incense. 2 He cried out against the altar by the word of the Lord: “Altar, altar, thus says the Lord: A child shall be born to the house of David, Josiah by name, who shall slaughter upon you the priests of the high places who burn incense upon you, and they shall burn human bones upon you.” 3 He also gave a sign that same day and said: “This is the sign that the Lord has spoken: The altar shall be torn apart and the ashes on it shall be scattered.” 4 When the king heard the word of the man of God which he was crying out against the altar in Bethel, Jeroboam stretched forth his hand from the altar and said, “Seize him!” But the hand he stretched forth against him withered, so that he could not draw it back. 5 (The altar was torn apart and the ashes from the altar were scattered, in accordance with the sign the man of God gave by the word of the Lord.)
6 Then the king said to the man of God, “Entreat the Lord, your God, and intercede for me that my hand may be restored.” So the man of God entreated the Lord, and the king’s hand was restored as it was before. 7 The king told the man of God, “Come with me to the house for some refreshment so that I may give you a present.” 8 The man of God said to the king, “If you gave me half your palace, I would not go with you, nor eat bread or drink water in this place. 9 For I was instructed by the word of the Lord: Do not eat bread or drink water, and do not return by the way you came.” 10 So he departed by another road and did not go back the way he had come to Bethel.
Prophetic Disunity. 11 There was an old prophet living in Bethel, whose son came and told him all that the man of God had done that day in Bethel. When his sons repeated to their father the words the man of God had spoken to the king, 12 the father asked them, “Which way did he go?” So his sons pointed out to him the road taken by the man of God who had come from Judah. 13 Then he said to his sons, “Saddle the donkey for me.” When they had saddled it, he mounted 
    14: and followed the man of God, whom he found seated under a terebinth. When he asked him, “Are you the man of God who came from Judah?” he answered, “Yes.” 
    15: Then he said, “Come home with me and have some bread.” 
    16: “I cannot return with you or go with you, and I cannot eat bread or drink water with you in this place,” he answered, 
    17: “for I was told by the word of the Lord: You shall not eat bread or drink water there, and do not go back the way you came.” 
    18: But he said to him, “I, too, am a prophet like you, and an angel told me by the word of the Lord: Bring him back with you to your house to eat bread and drink water.” But he was lying to him. 
    19: So he went back with him, and ate bread and drank water in his house. 
    20: But while they were sitting at table, the word of the Lord came to the prophet who had brought him back, 
    21: and he cried out to the man of God who had come from Judah: “Thus says the Lord: Because you rebelled against the charge of the Lord and did not keep the command which the Lord, your God, gave you, 
    22: but returned and ate bread and drank water in the place where he told you, Do not eat bread or drink water, your corpse shall not be brought to the grave of your ancestors.” 
    23: After he had eaten bread and drunk, they saddled for him the donkey that belonged to the prophet who had brought him back, 
    24: and he set out. But a lion met him on the road, and killed him. His body lay sprawled on the road, and the donkey remained standing by it, and so did the lion.

    25: Some passersby saw the body lying in the road, with the lion standing beside it, and carried the news to the city where the old prophet lived. 
    26: On hearing it, the prophet who had brought him back from his journey said: “It is the man of God who rebelled against the charge of the Lord. The Lord has delivered him to a lion, which mangled and killed him, according to the word which the Lord had spoken to him.” 
    27: Then he said to his sons, “Saddle the donkey for me,” and they saddled it. 
    28: He went off and found the body sprawled on the road with the donkey and the lion standing beside it. The lion had not eaten the body nor had it harmed the donkey. 
    29: The prophet lifted up the body of the man of God and put it on the donkey, and brought him back to the city to mourn and to bury him. 
    30: He laid the man’s body in his own grave, and they mourned over it: “Alas, my brother!” 
    31: After he had buried him, he said to his sons, “When I die, bury me in the grave where the man of God is buried. Lay my bones beside his. 
    32: For the word which he proclaimed by the word of the Lord against the altar in Bethel and against all the temples on the high places in the cities of Samaria shall certainly come to pass.”

    33: Even after this, Jeroboam did not turn from his evil way, but again made priests for the high places from among the common people. Whoever desired it was installed as a priest of the high places. 
    34: This is the account of the sin of the house of Jeroboam for which it was to be cut off and destroyed from the face of the earth.


  Chapter 14.

    1: 
Ahijah Announces Jeroboam’s Downfall. 1 At that time Abijah, son of Jeroboam, took sick. 
    2: So Jeroboam said to his wife, “Go and disguise yourself so that no one will recognize you as Jeroboam’s wife. Then go to Shiloh, where you will find Ahijah the prophet. It was he who spoke the word that made me king over this people. 
    3: 
    4: Ahijah Announces Jeroboam’s Downfall. 1 At that time Abijah, son of Jeroboam, took sick. 2 So Jeroboam said to his wife, “Go and disguise yourself so that no one will recognize you as Jeroboam’s wife. Then go to Shiloh, where you will find Ahijah the prophet. It was he who spoke the word that made me king over this people. 3 Take along ten loaves, some cakes, and a jar of honey, and go to him. He will tell you what will happen to the child.” 4 The wife of Jeroboam did so. She left and went to Shiloh and came to the house of Ahijah.
Now Ahijah could not see because age had dimmed his sight. 
    5: But the Lord said to Ahijah: Jeroboam’s wife is coming to consult you about her son, for he is sick. Thus and so you must tell her. When she comes, she will be in disguise. 
    6: So Ahijah, hearing the sound of her footsteps as she entered the door, said, “Come in, wife of Jeroboam. Why are you in disguise? For my part, I have been commissioned to give you bitter news. 
    7: Go, tell Jeroboam, ‘Thus says the Lord, the God of Israel: I exalted you from among the people and made you ruler of my people Israel. 
    8: I tore the kingdom away from the house of David and gave it to you. Yet you have not been like my servant David, who kept my commandments and followed me with his whole heart, doing only what is right in my sight. 
    9: ou have done more evil than all who were before you: you have gone and made for yourself other gods and molten images to provoke me; but me you have cast behind your back. 
    10: Therefore, I am bringing evil upon the house of Jeroboam:
I will cut off from Jeroboam’s line every male
    —bond or free—in Israel;
I will burn up what is left of the house of Jeroboam
    as dung is burned, completely.

    11: 
Anyone of Jeroboam’s line who dies in the city,
    dogs will devour;
anyone who dies in the field,
    the birds of the sky will devour.
For the Lord has spoken!’ 
    12: As for you, leave, and go home! As you step inside the city, the child will die, 
    13: 
    14: Ahijah Announces Jeroboam’s Downfall. 1 At that time Abijah, son of Jeroboam, took sick. 2 So Jeroboam said to his wife, “Go and disguise yourself so that no one will recognize you as Jeroboam’s wife. Then go to Shiloh, where you will find Ahijah the prophet. It was he who spoke the word that made me king over this people. 3 Take along ten loaves, some cakes, and a jar of honey, and go to him. He will tell you what will happen to the child.” 4 The wife of Jeroboam did so. She left and went to Shiloh and came to the house of Ahijah.
Now Ahijah could not see because age had dimmed his sight. 5 But the Lord said to Ahijah: Jeroboam’s wife is coming to consult you about her son, for he is sick. Thus and so you must tell her. When she comes, she will be in disguise. 6 So Ahijah, hearing the sound of her footsteps as she entered the door, said, “Come in, wife of Jeroboam. Why are you in disguise? For my part, I have been commissioned to give you bitter news. 7 Go, tell Jeroboam, ‘Thus says the Lord, the God of Israel: I exalted you from among the people and made you ruler of my people Israel. 8 I tore the kingdom away from the house of David and gave it to you. Yet you have not been like my servant David, who kept my commandments and followed me with his whole heart, doing only what is right in my sight. 9 You have done more evil than all who were before you: you have gone and made for yourself other gods and molten images to provoke me; but me you have cast behind your back. 10 Therefore, I am bringing evil upon the house of Jeroboam:
I will cut off from Jeroboam’s line every male
    —bond or free—in Israel;
I will burn up what is left of the house of Jeroboam
    as dung is burned, completely.
11 
Anyone of Jeroboam’s line who dies in the city,
    dogs will devour;
anyone who dies in the field,
    the birds of the sky will devour.
For the Lord has spoken!’ 12 As for you, leave, and go home! As you step inside the city, the child will die, 13 and all Israel will mourn him and bury him, for he alone of Jeroboam’s line will be laid in the grave, since in him alone of Jeroboam’s house has something pleasing to the Lord, the God of Israel, been found. 14 The Lord will raise up for himself a king over Israel who will cut off the house of Jeroboam—today, at this very moment! 
    15: The Lord will strike Israel like a reed tossed about in the water and will pluck out Israel from this good land which he gave their ancestors, and will scatter them beyond the River, because they made asherahs for themselves, provoking the Lord. 
    16: He will give up Israel because of the sins Jeroboam has committed and caused Israel to commit.” 
    17: So Jeroboam’s wife left and went back; when she came to Tirzah and crossed the threshold of her house, the child died. 
    18: He was buried and all Israel mourned him, according to the word of the Lord spoken through his servant Ahijah the prophet.

    19: The rest of the acts of Jeroboam, how he fought and how he reigned, these are recorded in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel. 
    20: The length of Jeroboam’s reign was twenty-two years. He rested with his ancestors, and Nadab his son succeeded him as king.
III. Kings of Judah and Israel
Reign of Rehoboam. 
    21: Rehoboam, son of Solomon, became king in Judah. Rehoboam was forty-one years old when he became king, and he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city in which, out of all the tribes of Israel, the Lord chose to set his name. His mother’s name was Naamah the Ammonite.

    22: Judah did evil in the Lord’s sight and they angered him even more than their ancestors had done. 
    23: They, too, built for themselves high places, sacred pillars, and asherahs, upon every high hill and under every green tree. 
    24: There were also pagan priests in the land. Judah imitated all the abominable practices of the nations whom the Lord had driven out of the Israelites’ way. 
    25: In the fifth year of King Rehoboam, Shishak, king of Egypt, attacked Jerusalem. 
    26: He took everything, including the treasures of the house of the Lord and the treasures of the house of the king, even the gold shields Solomon had made. 
    27: To replace them, King Rehoboam made bronze shields, which he entrusted to the officers of the guard on duty at the entrance of the royal house. 
    28: Whenever the king visited the house of the Lord, those on duty would carry the shields, and then return them to the guardroom.

    29: The rest of the acts of Rehoboam, with all that he did, are recorded in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah. 
    30: There was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all their days. 
    31: Rehoboam rested with his ancestors; he was buried with his ancestors in the City of David. His mother’s name was Naamah the Ammonite. His son Abijam succeeded him as king.


  Chapter 15.

    1: 
Reign of Abijam. 1 In the eighteenth year of King Jeroboam, son of Nebat, Abijam became king of Judah; 
    2: he reigned three years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Maacah, daughter of Abishalom.

    3: He followed all the sins his father had committed before him, and his heart was not entirely with the Lord, his God, as was the heart of David his father. 
    4: 
    5: Reign of Abijam. 1 In the eighteenth year of King Jeroboam, son of Nebat, Abijam became king of Judah; 2 he reigned three years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Maacah, daughter of Abishalom.
3 He followed all the sins his father had committed before him, and his heart was not entirely with the Lord, his God, as was the heart of David his father. 4 Yet for David’s sake the Lord, his God, gave him a holding in Jerusalem, raising up his son after him and permitting Jerusalem to endure, 5 because David had done what was right in the sight of the Lord and did not disobey any of his commands as long as he lived, except in the case of Uriah the Hittite.

    6: There was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all their days. 
    7: The rest of the acts of Abijam, with all that he did, are recorded in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah. There was war between Abijam and Jeroboam. 
    8: Abijam rested with his ancestors; they buried him in the City of David, and his son Asa succeeded him as king.
Reign of Asa. 
    9: n the twentieth year of Jeroboam, king of Israel, Asa, king of Judah, became king; 
    10: he reigned forty-one years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Maacah, daughter of Abishalom. 
    11: Asa did what was right in the sight of the Lord like David his father, 
    12: banishing the pagan priests from the land and removing all the idols his ancestors had made. 
    13: He also deposed his grandmother Maacah from her position as queen mother, because she had made an outrageous object for Asherah. Asa cut down this object and burned it in the Wadi Kidron. 
    14: 
    15: Reign of Abijam. 1 In the eighteenth year of King Jeroboam, son of Nebat, Abijam became king of Judah; 2 he reigned three years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Maacah, daughter of Abishalom.
3 He followed all the sins his father had committed before him, and his heart was not entirely with the Lord, his God, as was the heart of David his father. 4 Yet for David’s sake the Lord, his God, gave him a holding in Jerusalem, raising up his son after him and permitting Jerusalem to endure, 5 because David had done what was right in the sight of the Lord and did not disobey any of his commands as long as he lived, except in the case of Uriah the Hittite.
6 There was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all their days. 7 The rest of the acts of Abijam, with all that he did, are recorded in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah. There was war between Abijam and Jeroboam. 8 Abijam rested with his ancestors; they buried him in the City of David, and his son Asa succeeded him as king.
Reign of Asa. 9 In the twentieth year of Jeroboam, king of Israel, Asa, king of Judah, became king; 10 he reigned forty-one years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Maacah, daughter of Abishalom. 11 Asa did what was right in the sight of the Lord like David his father, 12 banishing the pagan priests from the land and removing all the idols his ancestors had made. 13 He also deposed his grandmother Maacah from her position as queen mother, because she had made an outrageous object for Asherah. Asa cut down this object and burned it in the Wadi Kidron. 14 The high places did not disappear; yet Asa’s heart was entirely with the Lord as long as he lived. 15 He brought into the house of the Lord his father’s and his own votive offerings of silver and gold and various vessels. 
    16: There was war between Asa and Baasha, king of Israel, all their days. 
    17: Baasha, king of Israel, attacked Judah and fortified Ramah to blockade Asa, king of Judah. 
    18: Asa then took all the silver and gold remaining in the treasuries of the house of the Lord and the house of the king. Entrusting them to his ministers, King Asa sent them to Ben-hadad, son of Tabrimmon, son of Hezion, king of Aram, who ruled in Damascus. He said: 
    19: “There is a treaty between you and me, as there was between your father and my father. I am sending you a present of silver and gold. Go, break your treaty with Baasha, king of Israel, that he may withdraw from me.” 
    20: Ben-hadad agreed with King Asa and sent the leaders of his troops against the cities of Israel. They attacked Ijon, Dan, Abel-beth-maacah, and all Chinnereth, besides all the land of Naphtali. 
    21: When Baasha heard of it, he left off fortifying Ramah, and stayed in Tirzah. 
    22: Then King Asa summoned all Judah without exception, and they carried away the stones and beams with which Baasha was fortifying Ramah. With them King Asa built Geba of Benjamin and Mizpah. 
    23: All the rest of the acts of Asa, with all his valor and all that he did, and the cities he built, are recorded in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah. But in his old age, Asa had an infirmity in his feet. 
    24: Asa rested with his ancestors; he was buried with his ancestors in the City of David his father, and his son Jehoshaphat succeeded him as king.
Reign of Nadab. 
    25: Nadab, son of Jeroboam, became king of Israel in the second year of Asa, king of Judah. For two years he reigned over Israel.

    26: He did what was evil in the Lord’s sight, walking in the way of his father and the sin he had caused Israel to commit. 
    27: Baasha, son of Ahijah, of the house of Issachar, plotted against him and struck him down at Gibbethon of the Philistines, which Nadab and all Israel were besieging. 
    28: Baasha killed him in the third year of Asa, king of Judah, and succeeded him as king. 
    29: Once he was king, he killed the entire house of Jeroboam, not leaving a single soul but destroying Jeroboam utterly, according to the word of the Lord spoken through his servant, Ahijah the Shilonite, 
    30: because of the sins Jeroboam committed and caused Israel to commit, by which he provoked the Lord, the God of Israel, to anger.

    31: The rest of the acts of Nadab, with all that he did, are recorded in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel. 
    32: There was war between Asa and Baasha, king of Israel, all their days.
Reign of Baasha. 
    33: In the third year of Asa, king of Judah, Baasha, son of Ahijah, became king of all Israel in Tirzah for twenty-four years.

    34: He did what was evil in the Lord’s sight, walking in the way of Jeroboam and the sin he had caused Israel to commit.


  Chapter 16.

    1: 
1 The word of the Lord came to Jehu, son of Hanani, against Baasha: 
    2: Inasmuch as I exalted you from the dust and made you ruler of my people Israel, but you have walked in the way of Jeroboam and have caused my people Israel to sin, provoking me to anger by their sins, 
    3: I will burn up what is left of Baasha and his house; I will make your house like that of Jeroboam, son of Nebat:

    4: 
One of Baasha’s line who dies in the city,
    dogs will devour;
One who dies in the field,
    the birds of the sky will devour.

    5: 
    6: 1 The word of the Lord came to Jehu, son of Hanani, against Baasha: 2 Inasmuch as I exalted you from the dust and made you ruler of my people Israel, but you have walked in the way of Jeroboam and have caused my people Israel to sin, provoking me to anger by their sins, 3 I will burn up what is left of Baasha and his house; I will make your house like that of Jeroboam, son of Nebat:
4 
One of Baasha’s line who dies in the city,
    dogs will devour;
One who dies in the field,
    the birds of the sky will devour.
5 The rest of the acts of Baasha, what he did and his valor, are recorded in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel. 6 Baasha rested with his ancestors; he was buried in Tirzah, and his son Elah succeeded him as king. 
    7: (Through the prophet Jehu, son of Hanani, the word of the Lord came against Baasha and his house, because of all the evil Baasha did in the sight of the Lord, provoking him to anger by his deeds so that he became like the house of Jeroboam, and because of what he destroyed.)
Reign of Elah. 
    8: In the twenty-sixth year of Asa, king of Judah, Elah, son of Baasha, became king of Israel in Tirzah for two years.

    9: is servant Zimri, commander of half his chariots, plotted against him. As he was in Tirzah, drinking to excess in the house of Arza, master of his palace in Tirzah, 
    10: Zimri entered; he struck and killed him in the twenty-seventh year of Asa, king of Judah, and succeeded him as king. 
    11: Once he was king, seated on the throne, he killed the whole house of Baasha, not sparing a single male relative or friend of his. 
    12: Zimri destroyed the entire house of Baasha, according to the word the Lord spoke against Baasha through Jehu the prophet, 
    13: because of all the sins which Baasha and his son Elah committed and caused Israel to commit, provoking the Lord, the God of Israel, to anger by their idols.

    14: The rest of the acts of Elah, with all that he did, are recorded in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
Reign of Zimri. 
    15: 
    16: 1 The word of the Lord came to Jehu, son of Hanani, against Baasha: 2 Inasmuch as I exalted you from the dust and made you ruler of my people Israel, but you have walked in the way of Jeroboam and have caused my people Israel to sin, provoking me to anger by their sins, 3 I will burn up what is left of Baasha and his house; I will make your house like that of Jeroboam, son of Nebat:
4 
One of Baasha’s line who dies in the city,
    dogs will devour;
One who dies in the field,
    the birds of the sky will devour.
5 The rest of the acts of Baasha, what he did and his valor, are recorded in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel. 6 Baasha rested with his ancestors; he was buried in Tirzah, and his son Elah succeeded him as king. 7 (Through the prophet Jehu, son of Hanani, the word of the Lord came against Baasha and his house, because of all the evil Baasha did in the sight of the Lord, provoking him to anger by his deeds so that he became like the house of Jeroboam, and because of what he destroyed.)
Reign of Elah. 8 In the twenty-sixth year of Asa, king of Judah, Elah, son of Baasha, became king of Israel in Tirzah for two years.
9 His servant Zimri, commander of half his chariots, plotted against him. As he was in Tirzah, drinking to excess in the house of Arza, master of his palace in Tirzah, 10 Zimri entered; he struck and killed him in the twenty-seventh year of Asa, king of Judah, and succeeded him as king. 11 Once he was king, seated on the throne, he killed the whole house of Baasha, not sparing a single male relative or friend of his. 12 Zimri destroyed the entire house of Baasha, according to the word the Lord spoke against Baasha through Jehu the prophet, 13 because of all the sins which Baasha and his son Elah committed and caused Israel to commit, provoking the Lord, the God of Israel, to anger by their idols.
14 The rest of the acts of Elah, with all that he did, are recorded in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
Reign of Zimri. 15 In the twenty-seventh year of Asa, king of Judah, Zimri became king for seven days in Tirzah.
The army was encamped at Gibbethon of the Philistines 16 when they heard, “Zimri has formed a conspiracy and has killed the king.” So that day in the camp all Israel made Omri, commander of the army, king of Israel. 
    17: Omri and all Israel with him marched up from Gibbethon and besieged Tirzah. 
    18: When Zimri saw that the city was captured, he entered the citadel of the king’s house and burned it down over him. He died 
    19: because of the sins he had committed, doing what was evil in the Lord’s sight by walking in the way of Jeroboam and the sin he had caused Israel to commit.

    20: The rest of the acts of Zimri, with the conspiracy he carried out, are recorded in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
Civil War. 
    21: At that time the people of Israel were divided in two, half following Tibni, son of Ginath, to make him king, and half for Omri. 
    22: The partisans of Omri prevailed over those of Tibni, son of Ginath. Tibni died and Omri became king.
Reign of Omri. 
    23: In the thirty-first year of Asa, king of Judah, Omri became king of Israel for twelve years; the first six of them he reigned in Tirzah.

    24: He then bought the mountain of Samaria from Shemer for two silver talents and built upon the mountain the city he named Samaria, after Shemer, the former owner. 
    25: But Omri did what was evil in the Lord’s sight, more than any of his predecessors. 
    26: In every way he imitated the sinful conduct of Jeroboam, son of Nebat, and the sin he had caused Israel to commit, thus provoking the Lord, the God of Israel, to anger by their idols.

    27: The rest of the acts of Omri, what he did and his valor, are recorded in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel. 
    28: Omri rested with his ancestors; he was buried in Samaria, and Ahab his son succeeded him as king.
Reign of Ahab. 
    29: Ahab, son of Omri, became king of Israel in the thirty-eighth year of Asa, king of Judah. Ahab, son of Omri, reigned over Israel in Samaria for twenty-two years.

    30: Ahab, son of Omri, did what was evil in the Lord’s sight more than any of his predecessors. 
    31: It was not enough for him to follow the sins of Jeroboam, son of Nebat. He even married Jezebel, daughter of Ethbaal, king of the Sidonians, and began to serve Baal, and worship him. 
    32: Ahab set up an altar to Baal in the house of Baal which he built in Samaria, 
    33: and also made an asherah. Ahab did more to provoke the Lord, the God of Israel, to anger than any of the kings of Israel before him. 
    34: During his reign, Hiel from Bethel rebuilt Jericho. At the cost of Abiram, his firstborn son, he laid the foundation, and at the cost of Segub, his youngest son, he set up the gates, according to the word of the Lord spoken through Joshua, son of Nun.


End of day 79.