Day 294:

Reading Luke, chapters ['1', '2', '3', '4']:

  Chapter 1.

    1: 1 Since many have undertaken to compile a narrative of the events that have been fulfilled among us, 
    2: just as those who were eyewitnesses from the beginning and ministers of the word have handed them down to us, 
    3: I too have decided, after investigating everything accurately anew, to write it down in an orderly sequence for you, most excellent Theophilus, 
    4: so that you may realize the certainty of the teachings you have received.
II. The Infancy Narrative
Announcement of the Birth of John. 
    5: In the days of Herod, King of Judea, there was a priest named Zechariah of the priestly division of Abijah; his wife was from the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elizabeth. 
    6: Both were righteous in the eyes of God, observing all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blamelessly. 
    7: But they had no child, because Elizabeth was barren and both were advanced in years. 
    8: Once when he was serving as priest in his division’s turn before God, 
    9: ccording to the practice of the priestly service, he was chosen by lot to enter the sanctuary of the Lord to burn incense. 
    10: Then, when the whole assembly of the people was praying outside at the hour of the incense offering, 
    11: the angel of the Lord appeared to him, standing at the right of the altar of incense. 
    12: Zechariah was troubled by what he saw, and fear came upon him. 
    13: But the angel said to him, “Do not be afraid, Zechariah, because your prayer has been heard. Your wife Elizabeth will bear you a son, and you shall name him John. 
    14: And you will have joy and gladness, and many will rejoice at his birth, 
    15: for he will be great in the sight of  Lord. He will drink neither wine nor strong drink.[f] He will be filled with the holy Spirit even from his mother’s womb, 
    16: and he will turn many of the children of Israel to the Lord their God. 
    17: He will go before him in the spirit and power of Elijah to turn the hearts of fathers toward children and the disobedient to the understanding of the righteous, to prepare a people fit for the Lord.” 
    18: Then Zechariah said to the angel, “How shall I know this? For I am an old man, and my wife is advanced in years.” 
    19: And the angel said to him in reply, “I am Gabriel, who stand before God. I was sent to speak to you and to announce to you this good news. 
    20: But now you will be speechless and unable to talk until the day these things take place, because you did not believe my words, which will be fulfilled at their proper time.”

    21: Meanwhile the people were waiting for Zechariah and were amazed that he stayed so long in the sanctuary. 
    22: But when he came out, he was unable to speak to them, and they realized that he had seen a vision in the sanctuary. He was gesturing to them but remained mute. 
    23: Then, when his days of ministry were completed, he went home. 
    24: After this time his wife Elizabeth conceived, and she went into seclusion for five months, saying, 
    25: “So has the Lord done for me at a time when he has seen fit to take away my disgrace before others.”
Announcement of the Birth of Jesus. 
    26: In the sixth month, the angel Gabriel was sent from God to a town of Galilee called Nazareth, 
    27: to a virgin betrothed to a man named Joseph, of the house of David, and the virgin’s name was Mary. 
    28: And coming to her, he said, “Hail, favored one! The Lord is with you.” 
    29: But she was greatly troubled at what was said and pondered what sort of greeting this might be. 
    30: Then the angel said to her, “Do not be afraid, Mary, for you have found favor with God. 
    31: Behold, you will conceive in your womb and bear a son, and you shall name him Jesus. 
    32: He will be great and will be called Son of the Most High, and the Lord God will give him the throne of David his father, 
    33: and he will rule over the house of Jacob forever, and of his kingdom there will be no end.” 
    34: But Mary said to the angel, “How can this be, since I have no relations with a man?” 
    35: And the angel said to her in reply, “The holy Spirit will come upon you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you. Therefore the child to be born will be called holy, the Son of God. 
    36: And behold, Elizabeth, your relative, has also conceived a son in her old age, and this is the sixth month for her who was called barren; 
    37: for nothing will be impossible for God.” 
    38: Mary said, “Behold, I am the handmaid of the Lord. May it be done to me according to your word.” Then the angel departed from her.
Mary Visits Elizabeth. 
    39: During those days Mary set out and traveled to the hill country in haste to a town of Judah, 
    40: where she entered the house of Zechariah and greeted Elizabeth. 
    41: When Elizabeth heard Mary’s greeting, the infant leaped in her womb, and Elizabeth, filled with the holy Spirit, 
    42: cried out in a loud voice and said, “Most blessed are you among women, and blessed is the fruit of your womb. 
    43: And how does this happen to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me? 
    44: For at the moment the sound of your greeting reached my ears, the infant in my womb leaped for joy. 
    45: Blessed are you who believed that what was spoken to you by the Lord would be fulfilled.”
The Canticle of Mary. 
    46: And Mary said:
“My soul proclaims the greatness of the Lord;

    47: 
    my spirit rejoices in God my savior.

    48: 
For he has looked upon his handmaid’s lowliness;
    behold, from now on will all ages call me blessed.

    49: 
The Mighty One has done great things for me,
    and holy is his name.

    50: 
His mercy is from age to age
    to those who fear him.

    51: 
He has shown might with his arm,
    dispersed the arrogant of mind and heart.

    52: 
He has thrown down the rulers from their thrones
    but lifted up the lowly.

    53: 
The hungry he has filled with good things;
    the rich he has sent away empty.

    54: 
He has helped Israel his servant,
    remembering his mercy,

    55: 
according to his promise to our fathers,
    to Abraham and to his descendants forever.”

    56: Mary remained with her about three months and then returned to her home.
The Birth of John. 
    57: When the time arrived for Elizabeth to have her child she gave birth to a son. 
    58: Her neighbors and relatives heard that the Lord had shown his great mercy toward her, and they rejoiced with her. 
    59: When they came on the eighth day to circumcise the child, they were going to call him Zechariah after his father, 
    60: but his mother said in reply, “No. He will be called John.” 
    61: But they answered her, “There is no one among your relatives who has this name.” 
    62: So they made signs, asking his father what he wished him to be called. 
    63: He asked for a tablet and wrote, “John is his name,” and all were amazed. 
    64: Immediately his mouth was opened, his tongue freed, and he spoke blessing God. 
    65: Then fear came upon all their neighbors, and all these matters were discussed throughout the hill country of Judea. 
    66: All who heard these things took them to heart, saying, “What, then, will this child be?” For surely the hand of the Lord was with him.
The Canticle of Zechariah. 
    67: Then Zechariah his father, filled with the holy Spirit, prophesied, saying:

    68: 
“Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel,
    for he has visited and brought redemption to his people.

    69: 
He has raised up a horn for our salvation
    within the house of David his servant,

    70: 
even as he promised through the mouth of his holy prophets from of old:

    71: 
    salvation from our enemies and from the hand of all who hate us,

    72: 
to show mercy to our fathers
    and to be mindful of his holy covenant

    73: 
and of the oath he swore to Abraham our father,
    and to grant us that, 
    74: rescued from the hand of enemies,
without fear we might worship him 
    75: in holiness and righteousness
    before him all our days.

    76: 
And you, child, will be called prophet of the Most High,
    for you will go before the Lord to prepare his ways,

    77: 
to give his people knowledge of salvation
    through the forgiveness of their sins,

    78: 
because of the tender mercy of our God
    by which the daybreak from on high will visit us

    79: 
to shine on those who sit in darkness and death’s shadow,
    to guide our feet into the path of peace.”

    80: The child grew and became strong in spirit, and he was in the desert until the day of his manifestation to Israel.


  Chapter 2.

    1: 
    2: The Birth of Jesus. 1 In those days a decree went out from Caesar Augustus[b] that the whole world should be enrolled. 2 This was the first enrollment, when Quirinius was governor of Syria. 
    3: So all went to be enrolled, each to his own town. 
    4: And Joseph too went up from Galilee from the town of Nazareth to Judea, to the city of David that is called Bethlehem, because he was of the house and family of David, 
    5: to be enrolled with Mary, his betrothed, who was with child. 
    6: While they were there, the time came for her to have her child, 
    7: and she gave birth to her firstborn son. She wrapped him in swaddling clothes and laid him in a manger, because there was no room for them in the inn.

    8: Now there were shepherds in that region living in the fields and keeping the night watch over their flock. 
    9: he angel of the Lord appeared to them and the glory of the Lord shone around them, and they were struck with great fear. 
    10: The angel said to them, “Do not be afraid; for behold, I proclaim to you good news of great joy that will be for all the people. 
    11: For today in the city of David a savior has been born for you who is Messiah and Lord. 
    12: And this will be a sign for you: you will find an infant wrapped in swaddling clothes and lying in a manger.” 
    13: And suddenly there was a multitude of the heavenly host with the angel, praising God and saying:

    14: 
“Glory to God in the highest
    and on earth peace to those on whom his favor rests.”
The Visit of the Shepherds. 
    15: When the angels went away from them to heaven, the shepherds said to one another, “Let us go, then, to Bethlehem to see this thing that has taken place, which the Lord has made known to us.” 
    16: So they went in haste and found Mary and Joseph, and the infant lying in the manger. 
    17: When they saw this, they made known the message that had been told them about this child. 
    18: All who heard it were amazed by what had been told them by the shepherds. 
    19: And Mary kept all these things, reflecting on them in her heart. 
    20: Then the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all they had heard and seen, just as it had been told to them.
The Circumcision and Naming of Jesus. 
    21: When eight days were completed for his circumcision, he was named Jesus, the name given him by the angel before he was conceived in the womb.
The Presentation in the Temple. 
    22: When the days were completed for their purification[i] according to the law of Moses, they took him up to Jerusalem to present him to the Lord, 
    23: just as it is written in the law of the Lord, “Every male that opens the womb shall be consecrated to the Lord,” 
    24: and to offer the sacrifice of “a pair of turtledoves or two young pigeons,” in accordance with the dictate in the law of the Lord.

    25: Now there was a man in Jerusalem whose name was Simeon. This man was righteous and devout, awaiting the consolation of Israel, and the holy Spirit was upon him. 
    26: It had been revealed to him by the holy Spirit that he should not see death before he had seen the Messiah of the Lord. 
    27: He came in the Spirit into the temple; and when the parents brought in the child Jesus to perform the custom of the law in regard to him, 
    28: he took him into his arms and blessed God, saying:

    29: 
“Now, Master, you may let your servant go
    in peace, according to your word,

    30: 
for my eyes have seen your salvation,

    31: 
    which you prepared in sight of all the peoples,

    32: 
a light for revelation to the Gentiles,
    and glory for your people Israel.”

    33: The child’s father and mother were amazed at what was said about him; 
    34: and Simeon blessed them and said to Mary his mother, “Behold, this child is destined for the fall and rise of many in Israel, and to be a sign that will be contradicted 
    35: (and you yourself a sword will pierce) so that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed.” 
    36: There was also a prophetess, Anna, the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Asher. She was advanced in years, having lived seven years with her husband after her marriage, 
    37: and then as a widow until she was eighty-four. She never left the temple, but worshiped night and day with fasting and prayer. 
    38: And coming forward at that very time, she gave thanks to God and spoke about the child to all who were awaiting the redemption of Jerusalem.
The Return to Nazareth. 
    39: When they had fulfilled all the prescriptions of the law of the Lord, they returned to Galilee, to their own town of Nazareth. 
    40: The child grew and became strong, filled with wisdom; and the favor of God was upon him.
The Boy Jesus in the Temple. 
    41: Each year his parents went to Jerusalem for the feast of Passover, 
    42: and when he was twelve years old, they went up according to festival custom. 
    43: After they had completed its days, as they were returning, the boy Jesus remained behind in Jerusalem, but his parents did not know it. 
    44: Thinking that he was in the caravan, they journeyed for a day and looked for him among their relatives and acquaintances, 
    45: but not finding him, they returned to Jerusalem to look for him. 
    46: After three days they found him in the temple, sitting in the midst of the teachers, listening to them and asking them questions, 
    47: and all who heard him were astounded at his understanding and his answers. 
    48: When his parents saw him, they were astonished, and his mother said to him, “Son, why have you done this to us? Your father and I have been looking for you with great anxiety.” 
    49: And he said to them, “Why were you looking for me? Did you not know that I must be in my Father’s house?” 
    50: But they did not understand what he said to them. 
    51: He went down with them and came to Nazareth, and was obedient to them; and his mother kept all these things in her heart. 
    52: And Jesus advanced  wisdom and age and favor before God and man.


  Chapter 3.

    1: In the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, when Pontius Pilate was governor of Judea, and Herod was tetrarch of Galilee, and his brother Philip tetrarch of the region of Ituraea and Trachonitis, and Lysanias was tetrarch of Abilene, 
    2: 
    3: The Preaching of John the Baptist. 1 In the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar,[b] when Pontius Pilate was governor of Judea, and Herod was tetrarch of Galilee, and his brother Philip tetrarch of the region of Ituraea and Trachonitis, and Lysanias was tetrarch of Abilene, 2 during the high priesthood of Annas and Caiaphas,[c] the word of God came to John the son of Zechariah in the desert. 3 [d]He went throughout [the] whole region of the Jordan, proclaiming a baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of sins, 
    4: as it is written in the book of the words of the prophet Isaiah:
“A voice of one crying out in the desert:
‘Prepare the way of the Lord,
    make straight his paths.

    5: 
Every valley shall be filled
    and every mountain and hill shall be made low.
The winding roads shall be made straight,
    and the rough ways made smooth,

    6: 
and all flesh shall see the salvation of God.’”

    7: He said to the crowds who came out to be baptized by him, “You brood of vipers! Who warned you to flee from the coming wrath? 
    8: Produce good fruits as evidence of your repentance; and do not begin to say to yourselves, ‘We have Abraham as our father,’ for I tell you, God can raise up children to Abraham from these stones. 
    9: ven now the ax lies at the root of the trees. Therefore every tree that does not produce good fruit will be cut down and thrown into the fire.”

    10: And the crowds asked him, “What then should we do?” 
    11: He said to them in reply, “Whoever has two tunics should share with the person who has none. And whoever has food should do likewise.” 
    12: Even tax collectors came to be baptized and they said to him, “Teacher, what should we do?” 
    13: He answered them, “Stop collecting more than what is prescribed.” 
    14: Soldiers also asked him, “And what is it that we should do?” He told them, “Do not practice extortion, do not falsely accuse anyone, and be satisfied with your wages.”

    15: Now the people were filled with expectation, and all were asking in their hearts whether John might be the Messiah. 
    16: John answered them all, saying, “I am baptizing you with water, but one mightier than I is coming. I am not worthy to loosen the thongs of his sandals. He will baptize you with the holy Spirit and fire. 
    17: His winnowing fan is in his hand to clear his threshing floor and to gather the wheat into his barn, but the chaff he will burn with unquenchable fire.” 
    18: Exhorting them in many other ways, he preached good news to the people. 
    19: Now Herod the tetrarch, who had been censured by him because of Herodias, his brother’s wife, and because of all the evil deeds Herod had committed, 
    20: added still another to these by  putting John in prison.
The Baptism of Jesus.[i] 
    21: After all the people had been baptized and Jesus also had been baptized and was praying, heaven was opened 
    22: and the holy Spirit descended upon him in bodily form like a dove. And a voice came from heaven, “You are my beloved Son; with you I am well pleased.”
The Genealogy of Jesus.[l] 
    23: When Jesus began his ministry he was about thirty years of age. He was the son, as was thought, of Joseph, the son of Heli, 
    24: the son of Matthat, the son of Levi, the son of Melchi, the son of Jannai, the son of Joseph, 
    25: the son of Mattathias, the son of Amos, the son of Nahum, the son of Esli, the son of Naggai, 
    26: the son of Maath, the son of Mattathias, the son of Semein, the son of Josech, the son of Joda, 
    27: the son of Joanan, the son of Rhesa, the son of Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, the son of Neri, 
    28: the son of Melchi, the son of Addi, the son of Cosam, the son of Elmadam, the son of Er, 
    29: the son of Joshua, the son of Eliezer, the son of Jorim, the son of Matthat, the son of Levi, 
    30: the son of Simeon, the son of Judah, the son of Joseph, the son of Jonam, the son of Eliakim, 
    31: the son of Melea, the son of Menna, the son of Mattatha, the son of Nathan, the son of David, 
    32: the son of Jesse, the son of Obed, the son of Boaz, the son of Sala, the son of Nahshon, 
    33: the son of Amminadab, the son of Admin, the son of Arni, the son of Hezron, the son of Perez, the son of Judah, 
    34: the son of Jacob, the son of Isaac, the son of Abraham, the son of Terah, the son of Nahor, 
    35: the son of Serug, the son of Reu, the son of Peleg, the son of Eber, the son of Shelah, 
    36: the son of Cainan, the son of Arphaxad, the son of Shem, the son of Noah, the son of Lamech, 
    37: the son of Methuselah, the son of Enoch, the son of Jared, the son of Mahalaleel, the son of Cainan, 
    38: the son of Enos, the son of Seth, the son of Adam, the son of God.


  Chapter 4.

    1: Filled with the holy Spirit, Jesus returned from the Jordan and was led by the Spirit into the desert 
    2: for forty days, to be tempted by the devil. He ate nothing during those days, and when they were over he was hungry. 
    3: 
    4: The Temptation of Jesus. 1 Filled with the holy Spirit,[b] Jesus returned from the Jordan and was led by the Spirit into the desert 2 for forty days,[c] to be tempted by the devil. He ate nothing during those days, and when they were over he was hungry. 3 The devil said to him, “If you are the Son of God, command this stone to become bread.” 4 Jesus answered him, “It is written, ‘One does not live by bread alone.’” 
    5: Then he took him up and showed him all the kingdoms of the world in a single instant. 
    6: The devil said to him, “I shall give to you all this power and their glory; for it has been handed over to me, and I may give it to whomever I wish. 
    7: All this will be yours, if you worship me.” 
    8: Jesus said to him in reply, “It is written:
‘You shall worship the Lord, your God,
    and him alone shall you serve.’”

    9: d]Then he led him to Jerusalem, made him stand on the parapet of the temple, and said to him, “If you are the Son of God, throw yourself down from here, 
    10: for it is written:
‘He will command his angels concerning you,
    to guard you,’

    11: and:
‘With their hands they will support you,
    lest you dash your foot against a stone.’”

    12: Jesus said to him in reply, “It also says, ‘You shall not put the Lord, your God, to the test.’” 
    13: When the devil had finished every temptation, he departed from him for a time.
IV. The Ministry in Galilee
The Beginning of the Galilean Ministry. 
    14: Jesus returned to Galilee in the power of the Spirit, and news of him spread throughout the whole region. 
    15: He taught in their synagogues and was praised by all.
The Rejection at Nazareth. 
    16: He came to Nazareth, where he had grown up, and went according to his custom into the synagogue on the sabbath day. He stood up to read 
    17: and was handed a scroll of the prophet Isaiah. He unrolled the scroll and found the passage where it was written:

    18: 
“The Spirit of the Lord is upon me,
    because he has anointed me
        to bring glad tidings to the poor.
He has sent me to proclaim liberty to captives
    and recovery of sight to the blind,
        to let the oppressed go free,

    19: 
and to proclaim a year acceptable to the Lord.”

    20: Rolling up the scroll, he handed it back to the attendant and sat down, and the eyes of all in the synagogue looked intently at him. 
    21: He said to them, “Today this scripture passage is fulfilled in your hearing.” 
    22: And all spoke highly of him and were amazed at the gracious words that came from his mouth. They also asked, “Isn’t this the son of Joseph?” 
    23: He said to them, “Surely you will quote me this proverb, ‘Physician, cure yourself,’ and say, ‘Do here in your native place the things that we heard were done in Capernaum.’” 
    24: And he said, “Amen, I say to you, no prophet is accepted in his own native place. 
    25: Indeed, I tell you, there were many widows in Israel in the days of Elijah when the sky was closed for three and a half years and a severe famine spread over the entire land. 
    26: It was to none of these that Elijah was sent, but only to a widow in Zarephath in the land of Sidon. 
    27: Again, there were many lepers in Israel during the time of Elisha the prophet; yet not one of them was cleansed, but only Naaman the Syrian.” 
    28: When the people in the synagogue heard this, they were all filled with fury. 
    29: They rose up, drove him out of the town, and led him to the brow of the hill on which their town had been built, to hurl him down headlong. 
    30: But he passed through the midst of them and went away.
The Cure of a Demoniac. 
    31: Jesus then went down to Capernaum, a town of Galilee. He taught them on the sabbath, 
    32: and they were astonished at his teaching because he spoke with authority. 
    33: In the synagogue there was a man with the spirit of an unclean demon, and he cried out in a loud voice, 
    34: “Ha! What have you to do with us, Jesus of Nazareth? Have you come to destroy us? I know who you are—the Holy One of God!” 
    35: Jesus rebuked him and said, “Be quiet! Come out of him!” Then the demon threw the man down in front of them and came out of him without doing him any harm. 
    36: They were all amazed and said to one another, “What is there about his word? For with authority and power he commands the unclean spirits, and they come out.” 
    37: And news of him spread everywhere in the surrounding region.
The Cure of Simon’s Mother-in-Law. 
    38: After he left the synagogue, he entered the house of Simon. Simon’s mother-in-law was afflicted with a severe fever, and they interceded with him about her. 
    39: He stood over her, rebuked the fever, and it left her. She got up immediately and waited on them.
Other Healings. 
    40: At sunset, all who had people sick with various diseases brought them to him. He laid his hands on each of them and cured them. 
    41: And demons also came out from many, shouting, “You are the Son of God.” But he rebuked them and did not allow them to speak because they knew that he was the Messiah.
Jesus Leaves Capernaum. 
    42: At daybreak, Jesus left and went to a deserted place. The crowds went looking for him, and when they came to him, they tried to prevent him from leaving them. 
    43: But he said to them, “To the other towns also I must proclaim the good news of the kingdom of God, because for this purpose I have been sent.” 
    44: And he was preaching in the synagogues of Judea.


End of day 294.