Day 115:

Reading Tobit, chapters ['9', '10', '11', '12']:

  Chapter 9.

    1: Then Tobiah called Raphael and said to him: 
    2: “Brother Azariah, take along with you from here four servants and two camels and travel to Rages. Go to Gabael’s house and give him this bond. Get the money and then bring him along with you to the wedding celebration. 
    3: For you know that my father will be counting the days. If I should delay even by a single day, I would cause him intense grief. 
    4: You have witnessed the oath that Raguel has sworn; I cannot violate his oath.” 
    5: So Raphael, together with the four servants and two camels, traveled to Rages in Media, where they stayed at Gabael’s house. Raphael gave Gabael his bond and told him about Tobit’s son Tobiah, that he had married and was inviting him to the wedding celebration. Gabael got up and counted out for him the moneybags with their seals, and they packed them on the camels.

    6: The following morning they both got an early start and traveled to the wedding celebration. When they entered Raguel’s house, they found Tobiah reclining at table. He jumped up and greeted Gabael, who wept and blessed him, exclaiming: “Good and noble child, son of a good and noble, righteous and charitable man, may the Lord bestow a heavenly blessing on you and on your wife, and on your wife’s father and mother. Blessed be God, because I have seen the very image of my cousin Tobit!”


  Chapter 10.

    1: 
Anxiety of the Parents. 1 Meanwhile, day by day, Tobit was keeping track of the time Tobiah would need to go and to return. When the number of days was reached and his son did not appear, 
    2: he said, “Could it be that he has been detained there? Or perhaps Gabael has died, and there is no one to give him the money?” 
    3: And he began to grieve. 
    4: His wife Anna said, “My son has perished and is no longer among the living!” And she began to weep aloud and to wail over her son: 
    5: “Alas, child, light of my eyes, that I have let you make this journey!” 
    6: But Tobit kept telling her: “Be still, do not worry, my sister; he is safe! Probably they have to take care of some unexpected business there. The man who is traveling with him is trustworthy and one of our kindred. So do not grieve over him, my sister. He will be here soon.” 
    7: But she retorted, “You be still, and do not try to deceive me! My son has perished!” She would rush out and keep watch every day at the road her son had taken. She ate nothing. After the sun had set, she would go back home to wail and cry the whole night through, getting no sleep at all.
Departure from Ecbatana. Now when the fourteen days of the wedding celebration, which Raguel had sworn to hold for his daughter, had come to an end, Tobiah went to him and said: “Send me off, now, since I know that my father and mother do not believe they will ever see me again. So I beg you, father, let me depart and go back to my own father. I have already told you how I left him.” 
    8: Raguel said to Tobiah: “Stay, son, stay with me. I am sending messengers to your father Tobit, and they will give him news of you.” 
    9: 
    10: Anxiety of the Parents. 1 Meanwhile, day by day, Tobit was keeping track of the time Tobiah would need to go and to return. When the number of days was reached and his son did not appear, 2 he said, “Could it be that he has been detained there? Or perhaps Gabael has died, and there is no one to give him the money?” 3 And he began to grieve. 4 His wife Anna said, “My son has perished and is no longer among the living!” And she began to weep aloud and to wail over her son: 5 “Alas, child, light of my eyes, that I have let you make this journey!” 6 But Tobit kept telling her: “Be still, do not worry, my sister; he is safe! Probably they have to take care of some unexpected business there. The man who is traveling with him is trustworthy and one of our kindred. So do not grieve over him, my sister. He will be here soon.” 7 But she retorted, “You be still, and do not try to deceive me! My son has perished!” She would rush out and keep watch every day at the road her son had taken. She ate nothing. After the sun had set, she would go back home to wail and cry the whole night through, getting no sleep at all.
Departure from Ecbatana. Now when the fourteen days of the wedding celebration, which Raguel had sworn to hold for his daughter, had come to an end, Tobiah went to him and said: “Send me off, now, since I know that my father and mother do not believe they will ever see me again. So I beg you, father, let me depart and go back to my own father. I have already told you how I left him.” 8 Raguel said to Tobiah: “Stay, son, stay with me. I am sending messengers to your father Tobit, and they will give him news of you.” 9 But Tobiah insisted, “No, I beg you to send me back to my father.”
10 Raguel then promptly handed over to Tobiah his wife Sarah, together with half of all his property: male and female slaves, oxen and sheep, donkeys and camels, clothing, money, and household goods. 
    11: He saw them safely off. Embracing Tobiah, he said to him: “Farewell, son. Have a safe journey. May the Lord of heaven grant prosperity to you and to your wife Sarah. And may I see children of yours before I die!” 
    12: Then he said to his daughter Sarah, “My daughter, honor your father-in-law and your mother-in-law, because from now on they are as much your parents as the ones who brought you into the world. Go in peace, daughter; let me hear a good report about you as long as I live.” Finally he said good-bye to them and let them go.
Edna also said to Tobiah: “My child and beloved kinsman, may the Lord bring you back safely, and may I live long enough to see children of you and of my daughter Sarah before I die. Before the Lord, I entrust my daughter to your care. Never cause her grief all the days of your life. Go in peace, son. From now on I am your mother, and Sarah is your sister. Together may we all prosper throughout the days of our lives.” She kissed them both and saw them safely off.

    13: Tobiah left Raguel, full of happiness and joy, and he blessed the Lord of heaven and earth, the King of all, for making his journey so successful. Finally he blessed Raguel and his wife Edna, and added, “I have been commanded by the Lord to honor you all the days of your life!”
New American Bible (Revised Edition) (NABRE)
Scripture texts, prefaces, introductions, footnotes and cross references used in this work are taken from the New American Bible, revised edition © 2010, 1991, 1986, 1970 Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, DC All Rights Reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the copyright owner.

  Chapter 11.

    1: 
Homeward Journey. 1 As they drew near to Kaserin, which is opposite Nineveh, 
    2: Raphael said: “You know how we left your father. 
    3: Let us hurry on ahead of your wife to prepare the house while they are still on the way.” 
    4: So both went on ahead together, and Raphael said to him, “Take the gall in your hand!” And the dog ran along behind them.

    5: Meanwhile, Anna sat watching the road by which her son was to come. 
    6: When she saw him coming, she called to his father, “Look, your son is coming, and the man who traveled with him!”

    7: Raphael said to Tobiah before he came near to his father: “I know that his eyes will be opened. 
    8: Apply the fish gall to his eyes, and the medicine will make the white scales shrink and peel off from his eyes; then your father will have sight again and will see the light of day.”
Sight Restored. 
    9: hen Anna ran up to her son, embraced him, and said to him, “Now that I have seen you again, son, I am ready to die!” And she sobbed aloud. 
    10: 
    11: Homeward Journey. 1 As they drew near to Kaserin, which is opposite Nineveh, 2 Raphael said: “You know how we left your father. 3 Let us hurry on ahead of your wife to prepare the house while they are still on the way.” 4 So both went on ahead together, and Raphael said to him, “Take the gall in your hand!” And the dog ran along behind them.
5 Meanwhile, Anna sat watching the road by which her son was to come. 6 When she saw him coming, she called to his father, “Look, your son is coming, and the man who traveled with him!”
7 Raphael said to Tobiah before he came near to his father: “I know that his eyes will be opened. 8 Apply the fish gall to his eyes, and the medicine will make the white scales shrink and peel off from his eyes; then your father will have sight again and will see the light of day.”
Sight Restored. 9 Then Anna ran up to her son, embraced him, and said to him, “Now that I have seen you again, son, I am ready to die!” And she sobbed aloud. 10 Tobit got up and stumbled out through the courtyard gate to meet his son. Tobiah went up to him 11 with the fish gall in his hand and blew into his eyes. Holding him firmly, he said, “Courage, father.” Then he applied the medicine to his eyes, and it made them sting. 
    12: , 
    13: Tobiah used both hands to peel the white scales from the corners of his eyes. Tobit saw his son and threw his arms around him. 
    14: Weeping, he exclaimed, “I can see you, son, the light of my eyes!” Then he prayed,
“Blessed be God,
    blessed be his great name,
    and blessed be all his holy angels.
May his great name be with us,
    and blessed be all the angels throughout all the ages.

    15: 
God it was who afflicted me,
    and God who has had mercy on me.
    Now I see my son Tobiah!”
Then Tobit went back in, rejoicing and praising God with full voice. Tobiah related to his father how his journey had been a success; that he had brought back the money; and that he had married Raguel’s daughter Sarah, who was about to arrive, for she was near the gate of Nineveh.

    16: Rejoicing and blessing God, Tobit went out to the gate of Nineveh to meet his daughter-in-law. When the people of Nineveh saw him coming, walking along briskly, with no one leading him by the hand, they were amazed. 
    17: Before them all Tobit proclaimed how God had shown mercy to him and opened his eyes. When Tobit came up to Sarah, the wife of his son Tobiah, he blessed her and said: “Welcome, my daughter! Blessed be your God for bringing you to us, daughter! Blessed are your father and your mother. Blessed be my son Tobiah, and blessed be you, daughter! Welcome to your home with blessing and joy. Come in, daughter!” That day there was joy for all the Jews who lived in Nineveh. 
    18: Ahiqar and his nephew Nadin were also on hand to rejoice with Tobit. Tobiah’s wedding feast was celebrated with joy for seven days, and many gifts were given to him.


  Chapter 12.

    1: 
    2: Raphael’s Wages. 1 When the wedding celebration came to an end, Tobit called his son Tobiah and said to him, “Son, see to it that you pay his wages to the man who made the journey with you and give him a bonus too.” 2 Tobiah said: “Father, how much shall I pay him? It would not hurt to give him half the wealth he brought back with me. 
    3: He led me back safe and sound, healed my wife, brought the money back with me, and healed you. How much should I pay him?” 
    4: Tobit answered, “It is only fair, son, that he should receive half of all that he brought back.” 
    5: So Tobiah called Raphael and said, “Take as your wages half of all that you have brought back, and farewell!”
Exhortation. 
    6: Raphael called the two of them aside privately and said to them: “Bless God and give him thanks before all the living for the good things he has done for you, by blessing and extolling his name in song. Proclaim before all with due honor the deeds of God, and do not be slack in thanking him. 
    7: A king’s secret should be kept secret, but one must declare the works of God and give thanks with due honor. Do good, and evil will not overtake you. 
    8: Prayer with fasting is good. Almsgiving with righteousness is better than wealth with wickedness. It is better to give alms than to store up gold, 
    9: or almsgiving saves from death, and purges all sin. Those who give alms will enjoy a full life, 
    10: but those who commit sin and do evil are their own worst enemies.
Raphael’s Identity. 
    11: 
    12: Raphael’s Wages. 1 When the wedding celebration came to an end, Tobit called his son Tobiah and said to him, “Son, see to it that you pay his wages to the man who made the journey with you and give him a bonus too.” 2 Tobiah said: “Father, how much shall I pay him? It would not hurt to give him half the wealth he brought back with me. 3 He led me back safe and sound, healed my wife, brought the money back with me, and healed you. How much should I pay him?” 4 Tobit answered, “It is only fair, son, that he should receive half of all that he brought back.” 5 So Tobiah called Raphael and said, “Take as your wages half of all that you have brought back, and farewell!”
Exhortation.[b] 6 Raphael called the two of them aside privately and said to them: “Bless God and give him thanks before all the living for the good things he has done for you, by blessing and extolling his name in song. Proclaim before all with due honor the deeds of God, and do not be slack in thanking him.[c] 7 A king’s secret should be kept secret, but one must declare the works of God and give thanks with due honor. Do good, and evil will not overtake you. 8 Prayer with fasting is good. Almsgiving with righteousness is better than wealth with wickedness. It is better to give alms than to store up gold, 9 for almsgiving saves from death, and purges all sin. Those who give alms will enjoy a full life, 10 but those who commit sin and do evil are their own worst enemies.
Raphael’s Identity. 11 “I shall now tell you the whole truth and conceal nothing at all from you. I have already said to you, ‘A king’s secret should be kept secret, but one must declare the works of God with due honor.’ 12 Now when you, Tobit, and Sarah prayed, it was I who presented the record of your prayer before the Glory of the Lord; and likewise whenever you used to bury the dead.[d] 
    13: When you did not hesitate to get up and leave your dinner in order to go and bury that dead man, 
    14: I was sent to put you to the test. At the same time, however, God sent me to heal you and your daughter-in-law Sarah. 
    15: I am Raphael, one of the seven angels who stand and serve before the Glory of the Lord.”

    16: Greatly shaken, the two of them fell prostrate in fear. 
    17: But Raphael said to them: “Do not fear; peace be with you! Bless God now and forever. 
    18: As for me, when I was with you, I was not acting out of any favor on my part, but by God’s will. So bless God every day; give praise with song. 
    19: Even though you saw me eat and drink, I did not eat or drink anything; what you were seeing was a vision. 
    20: So now bless the Lord on earth and give thanks to God. Look, I am ascending to the one who sent me. Write down all that has happened to you.” And he ascended. 
    21: They stood up but were no longer able to see him. 
    22: They kept blessing God and singing his praises, and they continued to give thanks for these marvelous works that God had done, because an angel of God appeared to them.


End of day 115.