Day 249:

Reading Ezekiel, chapters ['13', '14', '15', '16']:

  Chapter 13.

    1: 
Against the Prophets of Peace. 1 The word of the Lord came to me: 
    2: 
    3: Against the Prophets of Peace. 1 The word of the Lord came to me: 2 Son of man, prophesy against the prophets of Israel, prophesy! Say to those who prophesy their own thoughts: Hear the word of the Lord! 3 Thus says the Lord God: Woe to those prophets, the fools who follow their own spirit and see nothing. 
    4: Like foxes among ruins are your prophets, Israel! 
    5: You did not step into the breach, nor repair the wall around the house of Israel so it would stand firm against attack on the day of the Lord. 
    6: False visions! Lying divinations! They say, “The oracle of the Lord,” even though the Lord did not send them. Then they expect their word to be confirmed! 
    7: Was not the vision you saw false? Did you not report a lying divination when you said, “Oracle of the Lord,” even though I never spoke? 
    8: Therefore thus says the Lord God: Because you have spoken falsehood and seen lying visions, therefore, for certain I am coming at you—oracle of the Lord God. 
    9: y hand is against the prophets who see false visions and who make lying divinations. They shall not belong to the community of my people. They shall not be written in the register of the house of Israel, nor shall they enter the land of Israel. Thus you shall know that I am the Lord.

    10: Because they led my people astray, saying, “Peace!” when there is no peace, and when a wall is built, they cover it with whitewash, 
    11: say then to the whitewashers: I will bring down a flooding rain; hailstones shall fall, and a stormwind shall break forth. 
    12: 
    13: Against the Prophets of Peace. 1 The word of the Lord came to me: 2 Son of man, prophesy against the prophets of Israel, prophesy! Say to those who prophesy their own thoughts: Hear the word of the Lord! 3 Thus says the Lord God: Woe to those prophets, the fools who follow their own spirit and see nothing. 4 Like foxes among ruins are your prophets, Israel! 5 You did not step into the breach, nor repair the wall around the house of Israel so it would stand firm against attack on the day of the Lord. 6 False visions! Lying divinations! They say, “The oracle of the Lord,” even though the Lord did not send them. Then they expect their word to be confirmed! 7 Was not the vision you saw false? Did you not report a lying divination when you said, “Oracle of the Lord,” even though I never spoke? 8 Therefore thus says the Lord God: Because you have spoken falsehood and seen lying visions, therefore, for certain I am coming at you—oracle of the Lord God. 9 My hand is against the prophets who see false visions and who make lying divinations. They shall not belong to the community of my people. They shall not be written in the register of the house of Israel, nor shall they enter the land of Israel. Thus you shall know that I am the Lord.
10 Because they led my people astray, saying, “Peace!” when there is no peace, and when a wall is built, they cover it with whitewash, 11 say then to the whitewashers: I will bring down a flooding rain; hailstones shall fall, and a stormwind shall break forth. 12 When the wall has fallen, will you not be asked: “Where is the whitewash you spread on it?”
13 Therefore thus says the Lord God: In my fury I will let loose stormwinds; because of my anger there will be flooding rain, and hailstones will fall with destructive wrath. 
    14: I will tear down the wall you whitewashed and level it to the ground, laying bare its foundations. When it falls, you shall be crushed beneath it. Thus you shall know that I am the Lord. 
    15: When I have poured out my fury on the wall and its whitewashers, it will fall. Then I will say to you: No wall! No whitewashers— 
    16: the prophets of Israel who prophesy to Jerusalem and see visions of peace for it when there is no peace—oracle of the Lord God.
Against Witches. 
    17: As for you, son of man, now set your face against the daughters of your people who play the prophet from their own thoughts, and prophesy against them. 
    18: You shall say, Thus says the Lord God: Woe to those who sew amulets for the wrists of every arm and make veils for every head size to snare lives! You ensnare the lives of my people, even as you preserve your own lives! 
    19: You have profaned me among my people for handfuls of barley and crumbs of bread, slaying those who should not be slain, and keeping alive those who should not live, lying to my people, who listen to lies. 
    20: Therefore thus says the Lord God: See! I am coming after your amulets by which you ensnare lives like prey. I will tear them from your arms and set free the lives of those you have ensnared like prey. 
    21: I will tear off your veils and deliver my people from your power, so that they shall never again be ensnared by your hands. Thus you shall know that I am the Lord. 
    22: Because you discourage the righteous with lies when I did not want them to be distressed, and encourage the wicked so they do not turn from their evil ways and save their lives, 
    23: therefore you shall no longer see false visions or practice divination again. I will deliver my people from your hand. Thus you shall know that I am the Lord.


  Chapter 14.

    1: 
Idolatry and Unfaithfulness. 1 Some elders of Israel came and sat down before me. 
    2: Then the word of the Lord came to me: 
    3: 
    4: Idolatry and Unfaithfulness. 1 Some elders of Israel came and sat down before me. 2 Then the word of the Lord came to me: 3 Son of man, these men keep the memory of their idols alive in their hearts, setting the stumbling block of their sin before them. Should I allow myself to be consulted by them? 4 Therefore say to them: Thus says the Lord God: If any of the house of Israel who keep the memory of their idols in their hearts, setting the stumbling block of their sin before them, come to a prophet, I the Lord will answer in person because of their many idols, 
    5: in order to catch the hearts of the house of Israel, estranged from me because of all their idols.

    6: Therefore say to the house of Israel: Thus says the Lord God: Return, turn away from your idols; from all your abominations, turn your faces. 
    7: For if anyone of the house of Israel or any alien residing in Israel who are estranged from me and who keep their idols in their hearts, setting the stumbling block of their sin before them, come to ask a prophet to consult me on their behalf, I the Lord will answer them in person. 
    8: I will set my face against them and make them a sign and a byword, and cut them off from the midst of my people. Thus you shall know that I am the Lord.

    9: s for the prophet, if he speaks a deceiving word, I the Lord am the one who deceives that prophet. I will stretch out my hand against him and destroy him from the midst of my people Israel. 
    10: They will be punished for their own sins, the inquirer and the prophet alike, 
    11: so that the house of Israel may no longer stray from me, no longer defile themselves by all their sins. Then they shall be my people, and I shall be their God—oracle of the Lord God.
Just Cause. 
    12: The word of the Lord came to me: 
    13: 
    14: Idolatry and Unfaithfulness. 1 Some elders of Israel came and sat down before me. 2 Then the word of the Lord came to me: 3 Son of man, these men keep the memory of their idols alive in their hearts, setting the stumbling block of their sin before them. Should I allow myself to be consulted by them? 4 Therefore say to them: Thus says the Lord God: If any of the house of Israel who keep the memory of their idols in their hearts, setting the stumbling block of their sin before them, come to a prophet, I the Lord will answer in person because of their many idols, 5 in order to catch the hearts of the house of Israel, estranged from me because of all their idols.
6 Therefore say to the house of Israel: Thus says the Lord God: Return, turn away from your idols; from all your abominations, turn your faces. 7 For if anyone of the house of Israel or any alien residing in Israel who are estranged from me and who keep their idols in their hearts, setting the stumbling block of their sin before them, come to ask a prophet to consult me on their behalf, I the Lord will answer them in person. 8 I will set my face against them and make them a sign and a byword, and cut them off from the midst of my people. Thus you shall know that I am the Lord.
9 As for the prophet, if he speaks a deceiving word, I the Lord am the one who deceives that prophet. I will stretch out my hand against him and destroy him from the midst of my people Israel. 10 They will be punished for their own sins, the inquirer and the prophet alike, 11 so that the house of Israel may no longer stray from me, no longer defile themselves by all their sins. Then they shall be my people, and I shall be their God—oracle of the Lord God.
Just Cause.[b] 12 The word of the Lord came to me: 13 Son of man, if a land sins against me by breaking faith, and I stretch out my hand against it, breaking its staff of bread and setting famine loose upon it, cutting off from it human being and beast alike— 14 even if these three were in it, Noah, Daniel, and Job,[c] they could only save themselves by their righteousness—oracle of the Lord God. 
    15: If I summoned wild beasts to prowl the land, depopulating it so that it became a wasteland which no one would cross because of the wild beasts, 
    16: and these three were in it, as I live—oracle of the Lord God—I swear they could save neither sons nor daughters; they alone would be saved, but the land would become a wasteland. 
    17: Or if I bring the sword upon this land, commanding the sword to pass through the land cutting off from it human being and beast alike, 
    18: and these three were in it, as I live—oracle of the Lord God—they could save neither sons nor daughters; they alone would be saved. 
    19: Or if I send plague into this land, pouring out upon it my bloody wrath, cutting off from it human being and beast alike, 
    20: even if Noah, Daniel, and Job were in it, as I live—oracle of the Lord God—they could save neither son nor daughter; they would save only themselves by their righteousness.

    21: Thus says the Lord God: Even though I send against Jerusalem my four evil punishments—sword, famine, wild beasts, and plague—to cut off from it human being and beast alike, 
    22: there will still be some survivors in it who will bring out sons and daughters. When they come out to you and you see their ways and their deeds, you shall be consoled regarding the evil I brought on Jerusalem, everything I brought upon it. 
    23: They shall console you when you see their ways and their deeds, and you shall know that not without reason did I do to it everything I did—oracle of the Lord God.


  Chapter 15.

    1: 
Parable of the Vine. 1 The word of the Lord came to me:

    2: 
Son of man,
    what makes the wood of the vine
Better than the wood of branches
    found on the trees in the forest?

    3: 
Can wood be taken from it
    to make something useful?
Can someone make even a peg out of it
    on which to hang a vessel?

    4: 
    5: Parable of the Vine. 1 The word of the Lord came to me:
2 
Son of man,
    what makes the wood of the vine
Better than the wood of branches
    found on the trees in the forest?
3 
Can wood be taken from it
    to make something useful?
Can someone make even a peg out of it
    on which to hang a vessel?
4 
Of course not! If it is fed to the fire for fuel,
    and the fire devours both ends of it,
Leaving the middle charred,
    is it useful for anything then?
5 
Even when it is whole
    it cannot be used for anything;
So when fire has devoured and charred it,
    how useful can it be?

    6: 
Therefore, thus says the Lord God:
Like vine wood among forest trees,
    which I have given as fuel for fire,
So I will give the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

    7: 
I will set my face against them:
Although they have escaped the fire,
    the fire will still devour them;
You shall know that I am the Lord,
    when I set my face against them.

    8: 
Yes, I will make the land desolate,
    because they are so unfaithful—
    oracle of the Lord God.


  Chapter 16.

    1: 
A Parable of Infidelity. 1 The word of the Lord came to me: 
    2: Son of man, make known to Jerusalem her abominations. 
    3: You shall say, Thus says the Lord God to Jerusalem: By origin and birth you belong to the land of the Canaanites; your father was an Amorite, your mother a Hittite. 
    4: As for your birth, on the day you were born your navel cord was not cut; you were not washed with water or anointed; you were not rubbed with salt or wrapped in swaddling clothes. 
    5: 
    6: A Parable of Infidelity. 1 The word of the Lord came to me: 2 Son of man, make known to Jerusalem her abominations. 3 You shall say, Thus says the Lord God to Jerusalem: By origin and birth you belong to the land of the Canaanites; your father was an Amorite, your mother a Hittite. 4 [b]As for your birth, on the day you were born your navel cord was not cut; you were not washed with water or anointed; you were not rubbed with salt or wrapped in swaddling clothes. 5 No eye looked on you with pity or compassion to do any of these things for you. Rather, on the day you were born you were left out in the field, rejected.
6 Then I passed by and saw you struggling in your blood, and I said to you in your blood, “Live!” 
    7: I helped you grow up like a field plant, so that you grew, maturing into a woman with breasts developed and hair grown; but still you were stark naked. 
    8: I passed by you again and saw that you were now old enough for love. So I spread the corner of my cloak over you to cover your nakedness; I swore an oath to you and entered into covenant with you—oracle of the Lord God—and you became mine. 
    9: hen I bathed you with water, washed away your blood, and anointed you with oil. 
    10: I clothed you with an embroidered gown, put leather sandals on your feet; I gave you a fine linen sash and silk robes to wear. 
    11: I adorned you with jewelry, putting bracelets on your arms, a necklace about your neck, 
    12: a ring in your nose, earrings in your ears, and a beautiful crown on your head. 
    13: Thus you were adorned with gold and silver; your garments made of fine linen, silk, and embroidered cloth. Fine flour, honey, and olive oil were your food. You were very, very beautiful, fit for royalty. 
    14: You were renowned among the nations for your beauty, perfected by the splendor I showered on you—oracle of the Lord God.

    15: 
    16: A Parable of Infidelity. 1 The word of the Lord came to me: 2 Son of man, make known to Jerusalem her abominations. 3 You shall say, Thus says the Lord God to Jerusalem: By origin and birth you belong to the land of the Canaanites; your father was an Amorite, your mother a Hittite. 4 [b]As for your birth, on the day you were born your navel cord was not cut; you were not washed with water or anointed; you were not rubbed with salt or wrapped in swaddling clothes. 5 No eye looked on you with pity or compassion to do any of these things for you. Rather, on the day you were born you were left out in the field, rejected.
6 Then I passed by and saw you struggling in your blood, and I said to you in your blood, “Live!” 7 I helped you grow up like a field plant, so that you grew, maturing into a woman with breasts developed and hair grown; but still you were stark naked. 8 I passed by you again and saw that you were now old enough for love. So I spread the corner of my cloak[c] over you to cover your nakedness; I swore an oath to you and entered into covenant with you—oracle of the Lord God—and you became mine. 9 Then I bathed you with water, washed away your blood, and anointed you with oil. 10 I clothed you with an embroidered gown, put leather sandals on your feet; I gave you a fine linen sash and silk robes to wear. 11 I adorned you with jewelry, putting bracelets on your arms, a necklace about your neck, 12 a ring in your nose, earrings in your ears, and a beautiful crown on your head. 13 Thus you were adorned with gold and silver; your garments made of fine linen, silk, and embroidered cloth. Fine flour, honey, and olive oil were your food. You were very, very beautiful, fit for royalty. 14 You were renowned among the nations for your beauty, perfected by the splendor I showered on you—oracle of the Lord God.
15 But you trusted in your own beauty and used your renown to serve as a prostitute. You poured out your prostitution on every passerby—let it be his. 16 [d]You took some of your garments and made for yourself gaudy high places, where you served as a prostitute. It has never happened before, nor will it happen again! 
    17: You took the splendid gold and silver ornaments that I had given you and made for yourself male images and served as a prostitute with them. 
    18: You took your embroidered garments to cover them; my oil and my incense you set before them; 
    19: the food I had given you, the fine flour, the oil, and the honey with which I fed you, you set before them as a pleasant odor, says the Lord God. 
    20: The sons and daughters you bore for me you took and offered as sacrifices for them to devour! Was it not enough that you had become a prostitute? 
    21: You slaughtered and immolated my children to them, making them pass through fire. 
    22: In all your abominations and prostitutions you did not remember the days of your youth when you were stark naked, struggling in your blood.

    23: Then after all your evildoing—woe, woe to you! oracle of the Lord God— 
    24: you built yourself a platform and raised up a dais in every public place. 
    25: At every intersection you built yourself a dais so that you could degrade your beauty by spreading your legs for every passerby, multiplying your prostitutions. 
    26: You served as a prostitute with the Egyptians, your big-membered neighbors, and multiplied your prostitutions to provoke me. 
    27: Therefore I stretched out my hand against you and reduced your allotment, and delivered you over to the whim of your enemies, the Philistines, who were revolted by your depraved conduct. 
    28: You also served as a prostitute for the Assyrians, because you were not satisfied. Even after serving as a prostitute for them, you were still not satisfied. 
    29: You increased your prostitutions again, now going to Chaldea, the land of traders; but despite this, you were still not satisfied.

    30: How wild your lust!—oracle of the Lord God—that you did all these works of a shameless prostitute, 
    31: when you built your platform at every intersection and set up your high place in every public square. But unlike a prostitute, you disdained payment. 
    32: Adulterous wife, taking strangers in place of her husband! 
    33: Prostitutes usually receive gifts. But you bestowed gifts on all your lovers, bribing them to come to you for prostitution from every side. 
    34: Thus in your prostitution you were different from any other woman. No one solicited you for prostitution. Instead, you yourself offered payment; what a reversal!

    35: Therefore, prostitute, hear the word of the Lord! 
    36: Thus says the Lord God: Because you poured out your lust and exposed your nakedness in your prostitution with your lovers and your abominable idols, because you gave the life-blood of your children to them, 
    37: therefore, I will now gather together all your lovers with whom you found pleasure, both those you loved and those you hated; I will gather them against you from all sides and expose you naked for them to see. 
    38: I will inflict on you the sentence of adultery and murder; I will bring on you bloody wrath and jealous anger. 
    39: I will hand you over to them to tear down your platform and demolish your high place, to strip you of your garments and take away your splendid ornaments, leaving you stark naked. 
    40: They shall lead an assembly against you to stone you and hack you to pieces with their swords. 
    41: They shall set fire to your homes and inflict punishments on you while many women watch. Thus I will put an end to your prostitution, and you shall never again offer payment. 
    42: When I have spent my fury upon you I will stop being jealous about you, and calm down, no longer angry. 
    43: Because you did not remember the days of your youth but enraged me with all these things, see, I am bringing down your ways upon your head—oracle of the Lord God. Have you not added depravity to your other abominations?

    44: See, everyone who makes proverbs will make this proverb about you, “Like mother, like daughter.” 
    45: Yes, you are truly the daughter of your mother who rejected her husband and children: you are truly a sister to your sisters who rejected their husbands and children—your mother was a Hittite and your father an Amorite. 
    46: Your elder sister was Samaria with her daughters to the north of you; and your younger sister was Sodom and her daughters, south of you. 
    47: Not only did you walk in their ways and act as abominably as they did, but in a very short time you became more corrupt in all your ways than they were. 
    48: As I live—oracle of the Lord God—I swear that your sister Sodom with her daughters have not done the things you and your daughters have done! 
    49: Now look at the guilt of your sister Sodom: she and her daughters were proud, sated with food, complacent in prosperity. They did not give any help to the poor and needy. 
    50: Instead, they became arrogant and committed abominations before me; then, as you have seen, I removed them. 
    51: Samaria did not commit half the sins you did. You have done more abominable things than they did. You even made your sisters look righteous, with all the abominations you have done. 
    52: You, then, must bear your disgrace, for you have made a case for your sisters! Because your sins are more abominable than theirs, they seem righteous compared to you. Blush for shame, and bear the disgrace of having made your sisters appear righteous.

    53: I will restore their fortunes, the fortunes of Sodom and her daughters, the fortunes of Samaria and her daughters—and your fortunes along with them. 
    54: Thus you must bear your disgrace and be ashamed of all you have done to bring them comfort. 
    55: Yes, your sisters, Sodom and her daughters, Samaria and her daughters, shall return to the way they were, and you and your daughters shall return to the way you were. 
    56: Did you not hold your sister Sodom in bad repute while you felt proud of yourself, 
    57: before your evil was exposed? Now you are like her, reproached by the Arameans and all their neighbors, despised on all sides by the Philistines. 
    58: The penalty of your depravity and your abominations—you must bear it all—oracle of the Lord.

    59: For thus says the Lord God: I will deal with you for what you did; you despised an oath by breaking a covenant. 
    60: But I will remember the covenant I made with you when you were young; I will set up an everlasting covenant with you. 
    61: Then you shall remember your ways and be ashamed when you receive your sisters, those older and younger than you; I give them to you as daughters, but not by reason of your covenant. 
    62: For I will re-establish my covenant with you, that you may know that I am the Lord, 
    63: that you may remember and be ashamed, and never again open your mouth because of your disgrace, when I pardon you for all you have done—oracle of the Lord God.


End of day 249.