Day 220:

Reading Isaiah, chapters ['33', '34', '35', '36']:

  Chapter 33.

    1: 
Ah! You destroyer never destroyed,
    betrayer never betrayed!
When you have finished destroying, you will be destroyed;
    when you have stopped betraying, you will be betrayed.

    2: 
    3: 
Overthrow of Assyria
1 
Ah! You destroyer never destroyed,
    betrayer never betrayed!
When you have finished destroying, you will be destroyed;
    when you have stopped betraying, you will be betrayed.
2 
Lord, be gracious to us; for you we wait.
    Be our strength every morning,
    our salvation in time of trouble!
3 
At the roaring sound, peoples flee;
    when you rise in your majesty, nations are scattered.

    4: 
Spoil is gathered up as caterpillars gather,
    an onrush like the rush of locusts.

    5: 
The Lord is exalted, enthroned on high;
    he fills Zion with right and justice.

    6: 
That which makes her seasons certain,
    her wealth, salvation, wisdom, and knowledge,
    is the fear of the Lord, her treasure.

    7: 
See, the men of Ariel cry out in the streets,
    the messengers of Shalem weep bitterly.

    8: 
The highways are desolate,
    travelers have quit the paths,
Covenants are broken, witnesses spurned;
    yet no one gives it a thought.

    9: The country languishes in mourning,
    Lebanon withers with shame;
Sharon is like the Arabah,
    Bashan and Carmel are stripped bare.

    10: 
Now I will rise up, says the Lord,
    now exalt myself,
    now lift myself up.

    11: 
You conceive dry grass, bring forth stubble;
    my spirit shall consume you like fire.

    12: 
The peoples shall be burned to lime,
    thorns cut down to burn in fire.

    13: 
Hear, you who are far off, what I have done;
    you who are near, acknowledge my might.

    14: 
In Zion sinners are in dread,
    trembling grips the impious:
“Who of us can live with consuming fire?
    who of us can live with everlasting flames?”

    15: 
Whoever walks righteously and speaks honestly,
    who spurns what is gained by oppression,
Who waves off contact with a bribe,
    who stops his ears so as not to hear of bloodshed,
    who closes his eyes so as not to look on evil—

    16: 
That one shall dwell on the heights,
    with fortresses of rock for stronghold,
    food and drink in steady supply.

    17: 
Your eyes will see a king in his splendor,
    they will look upon a vast land.

    18: 
Your mind will dwell on the terror:
    “Where is the one who counted, where the one who weighed?
    Where the one who counted the towers?”

    19: 
You shall no longer see a defiant people,
    a people of speech too obscure to comprehend,
    stammering in a tongue not understood.

    20: 
Look to Zion, the city of our festivals;
    your eyes shall see Jerusalem
    as a quiet abode, a tent not to be struck,
Whose pegs will never be pulled up,
    nor any of its ropes severed.

    21: 
Indeed the Lord in majesty will be there for us
    a place of rivers and wide streams
    on which no galley may go,
    where no majestic ship may pass.

    22: 
For the Lord is our judge,
    the Lord is our lawgiver,
    the Lord is our king;
    he it is who will save us.

    23: 
The rigging hangs slack;
    it cannot hold the mast in place,
    nor keep the sail spread out.
Then the blind will divide great spoils
    and the lame will carry off the loot.

    24: 
No one who dwells there will say, “I am sick”;
    the people who live there will be forgiven their guilt.


  Chapter 34.

    1: 
Come near, nations, and listen;
    be attentive, you peoples!
Let the earth and what fills it listen,
    the world and all it produces.

    2: 
    3: 
    4: Judgment upon Edom
1 
Come near, nations, and listen;
    be attentive, you peoples!
Let the earth and what fills it listen,
    the world and all it produces.
2 
The Lord is angry with all the nations,
    enraged against all their host;
He has placed them under the ban,
    given them up to slaughter.
3 
Their slain shall be cast out,
    their corpses shall send up a stench;
    the mountains shall run with their blood,
4 
All the host of heaven shall rot;
    the heavens shall be rolled up like a scroll.
All their host shall wither away,
    as the leaf wilts on the vine,
    or as the fig withers on the tree.

    5: 
When my sword has drunk its fill in the heavens,
    it shall come down upon Edom for judgment,
    upon a people under my ban.

    6: 
The Lord has a sword sated with blood,
    greasy with fat,
With the blood of lambs and goats,
    with the fat of rams’ kidneys;
For the Lord has a sacrifice in Bozrah,
    a great slaughter in the land of Edom.

    7: 
Wild oxen shall be struck down with fatlings,
    and bullocks with bulls;
Their land shall be soaked with blood,
    and their soil greasy with fat.

    8: 
For the Lord has a day of vengeance,
    a year of requital for the cause of Zion.

    9: Edom’s streams shall be changed into pitch,
    its soil into sulfur,
    and its land shall become burning pitch;

    10: 
Night and day it shall not be quenched,
    its smoke shall rise forever.
From generation to generation it shall lie waste,
    never again shall anyone pass through it.

    11: 
But the desert owl and hoot owl shall possess it,
    the screech owl and raven shall dwell in it.
The Lord will stretch over it the measuring line of chaos,
    the plumb line of confusion.

    12: 
Its nobles shall be no more,
    nor shall kings be proclaimed there;
    all its princes are gone.

    13: 
Its castles shall be overgrown with thorns,
    its fortresses with thistles and briers.
It shall become an abode for jackals,
    a haunt for ostriches.

    14: 
Wildcats shall meet with desert beasts,
    satyrs shall call to one another;
There shall the lilith repose,
    and find for herself a place to rest.

    15: 
There the hoot owl shall nest and lay eggs,
    hatch them out and gather them in her shadow;
There shall the kites assemble,
    each with its mate.

    16: 
Search through the book of the Lord and read:
    not one of these shall be lacking,
For the mouth of the Lord has ordered it,
    and his spirit gathers them there.

    17: 
It is he who casts the lot for them;
    his hand measures off their portions;
They shall possess it forever,
    and dwell in it from generation to generation.


  Chapter 35.

    1: 
The wilderness and the parched land will exult;
    the Arabah will rejoice and bloom;

    2: 
    3: 
Israel’s Deliverance
1 
The wilderness and the parched land will exult;
    the Arabah will rejoice and bloom;
2 
Like the crocus it shall bloom abundantly,
    and rejoice with joyful song.
The glory of Lebanon will be given to it,
    the splendor of Carmel and Sharon;
They will see the glory of the Lord,
    the splendor of our God.
3 
Strengthen hands that are feeble,
    make firm knees that are weak,

    4: 
    5: Israel’s Deliverance
1 
The wilderness and the parched land will exult;
    the Arabah will rejoice and bloom;
2 
Like the crocus it shall bloom abundantly,
    and rejoice with joyful song.
The glory of Lebanon will be given to it,
    the splendor of Carmel and Sharon;
They will see the glory of the Lord,
    the splendor of our God.
3 
Strengthen hands that are feeble,
    make firm knees that are weak,
4 
Say to the fearful of heart:
    Be strong, do not fear!
Here is your God,
    he comes with vindication;
With divine recompense
    he comes to save you.
5 
Then the eyes of the blind shall see,
    and the ears of the deaf be opened;

    6: 
Then the lame shall leap like a stag,
    and the mute tongue sing for joy.
For waters will burst forth in the wilderness,
    and streams in the Arabah.

    7: 
The burning sands will become pools,
    and the thirsty ground, springs of water;
The abode where jackals crouch
    will be a marsh for the reed and papyrus.

    8: 
A highway will be there,
    called the holy way;
No one unclean may pass over it,
    but it will be for his people;
    no traveler, not even fools, shall go astray on it.

    9: No lion shall be there,
    nor any beast of prey approach,
    nor be found.
    But there the redeemed shall walk,

    10: 
And the ransomed of the Lord shall return,
    and enter Zion singing,
    crowned with everlasting joy;
They meet with joy and gladness,
    sorrow and mourning flee away.


  Chapter 36.

    1: In the fourteenth year of King Hezekiah, Sennacherib, king of Assyria, went up against all the fortified cities of Judah and captured them. 
    2: 
    3: 
Invasion of Sennacherib. 1 In the fourteenth year of King Hezekiah, Sennacherib, king of Assyria, went up against all the fortified cities of Judah and captured them. 2 From Lachish the king of Assyria sent his commander with a great army to King Hezekiah in Jerusalem. When he stopped at the conduit of the upper pool, on the highway of the fuller’s field, 3 there came out to him the master of the palace, Eliakim, son of Hilkiah, and Shebna the scribe, and the chancellor, Joah, son of Asaph. 
    4: The commander said to them, “Tell Hezekiah: Thus says the great king, the king of Assyria: On what do you base this trust of yours? 
    5: 
    6: Invasion of Sennacherib. 1 In the fourteenth year of King Hezekiah, Sennacherib, king of Assyria, went up against all the fortified cities of Judah and captured them. 2 From Lachish the king of Assyria sent his commander with a great army to King Hezekiah in Jerusalem. When he stopped at the conduit of the upper pool, on the highway of the fuller’s field, 3 there came out to him the master of the palace, Eliakim, son of Hilkiah, and Shebna the scribe, and the chancellor, Joah, son of Asaph. 4 The commander said to them, “Tell Hezekiah: Thus says the great king, the king of Assyria: On what do you base this trust of yours? 5 Do you think mere words substitute for strategy and might in war? In whom, then, do you place your trust, that you rebel against me? 6 Do you trust in Egypt, that broken reed of a staff which pierces the hand of anyone who leans on it? That is what Pharaoh, king of Egypt, is to all who trust in him. 
    7: Or do you say to me: It is in the Lord, our God, we trust? Is it not he whose high places and altars Hezekiah has removed, commanding Judah and Jerusalem, ‘Worship before this altar’?

    8: “Now, make a wager with my lord, the king of Assyria: I will give you two thousand horses, if you are able to put riders on them. 
    9: ow then can you turn back even a captain, one of the least servants of my lord, trusting, as you do, in Egypt for chariots and horses? 
    10: Did I come up to destroy this land without the Lord? The Lord himself said to me, Go up and destroy that land!”

    11: Then Eliakim and Shebna and Joah said to the commander, “Please speak to your servants in Aramaic; we understand it. Do not speak to us in the language of Judah within earshot of the people who are on the wall.”

    12: But the commander replied, “Was it to your lord and to you that my lord sent me to speak these words? Was it not rather to those sitting on the wall, who, with you, will have to eat their own excrement and drink their own urine?” 
    13: Then the commander stepped forward and cried out in a loud voice in the language of Judah, “Listen to the words of the great king, the king of Assyria. 
    14: Thus says the king: Do not let Hezekiah deceive you, for he cannot rescue you. 
    15: And do not let Hezekiah induce you to trust in the Lord, saying, ‘The Lord will surely rescue us, and this city will not be handed over to the king of Assyria.’ 
    16: Do not listen to Hezekiah, for thus says the king of Assyria:
Make peace with me
    and surrender to me!
Eat, each of you, from your vine,
    each from your own fig tree.
Drink water, each from your own well,

    17: 
    until I arrive and take you
    to a land like your own,
A land of grain and wine,
    a land of bread and vineyards.

    18: Do not let Hezekiah seduce you by saying, ‘The Lord will rescue us.’ Has any of the gods of the nations rescued his land from the power of the king of Assyria? 
    19: Where are the gods of Hamath and Arpad? Where are the gods of Sepharvaim? Where are the gods of Samaria? Have they saved Samaria from my power? 
    20: Who among all the gods of these lands ever rescued their land from my power, that the Lord should save Jerusalem from my power?” 
    21: But they remained silent and did not answer at all, for the king’s command was, “Do not answer him.”

    22: Then the master of the palace, Eliakim, son of Hilkiah, Shebna the scribe, and the chancellor Joah, son of Asaph, came to Hezekiah with their garments torn, and reported to him the words of the commander.


End of day 220.