Day 131:

Reading 2-Maccabees, chapters ['13', '14', '15']:

  Chapter 13.

    1: 
Death of Menelaus. 1 In the one hundred and forty-ninth year, Judas and his men learned that Antiochus Eupator was invading Judea with a large force, 
    2: 
    3: Death of Menelaus. 1 In the one hundred and forty-ninth year, Judas and his men learned that Antiochus Eupator was invading Judea with a large force, 2 and that with him was Lysias, his guardian, who was in charge of the government. They led[b] a Greek army of one hundred and ten thousand foot soldiers, fifty-three hundred cavalry, twenty-two elephants, and three hundred chariots armed with scythes.
3 Menelaus also joined them, and with great duplicity kept urging Antiochus on, not for the welfare of his country, but in the hope of being established in office. 
    4: But the King of kings aroused the anger of Antiochus against the scoundrel. When the king was shown by Lysias that Menelaus was to blame for all the trouble, he ordered him to be taken to Beroea and executed there in the customary local method. 
    5: There is at that place a tower seventy-five feet high, full of ashes, with a circular rim sloping down steeply on all sides toward the ashes. 
    6: Anyone guilty of sacrilege or notorious for certain other crimes is brought up there and then hurled down to destruction. 
    7: In such a manner was Menelaus, that transgressor of the law, fated to die, deprived even of burial. 
    8: It was altogether just that he who had committed so many sins against the altar with its pure fire and ashes, in ashes should meet his death.
Battle near Modein. 
    9: he king was advancing, his mind full of savage plans for inflicting on the Jews things worse than those they suffered in his father’s time. 
    10: When Judas learned of this, he urged the people to call upon the Lord day and night, now more than ever, to help them when they were about to be deprived of their law, their country, and their holy temple; 
    11: and not to allow this people, which had just begun to revive, to be subjected again to blasphemous Gentiles. 
    12: 
    13: Death of Menelaus. 1 In the one hundred and forty-ninth year, Judas and his men learned that Antiochus Eupator was invading Judea with a large force, 2 and that with him was Lysias, his guardian, who was in charge of the government. They led[b] a Greek army of one hundred and ten thousand foot soldiers, fifty-three hundred cavalry, twenty-two elephants, and three hundred chariots armed with scythes.
3 Menelaus also joined them, and with great duplicity kept urging Antiochus on, not for the welfare of his country, but in the hope of being established in office. 4 But the King of kings aroused the anger of Antiochus against the scoundrel. When the king was shown by Lysias that Menelaus was to blame for all the trouble, he ordered him to be taken to Beroea[c] and executed there in the customary local method. 5 There is at that place a tower seventy-five feet high, full of ashes,[d] with a circular rim sloping down steeply on all sides toward the ashes. 6 Anyone guilty of sacrilege or notorious for certain other crimes is brought up there and then hurled down to destruction. 7 In such a manner was Menelaus, that transgressor of the law, fated to die, deprived even of burial. 8 It was altogether just that he who had committed so many sins against the altar with its pure fire and ashes, in ashes should meet his death.
Battle near Modein. 9 The king was advancing, his mind full of savage plans for inflicting on the Jews things worse than those they suffered in his father’s time. 10 When Judas learned of this, he urged the people to call upon the Lord day and night, now more than ever, to help them when they were about to be deprived of their law, their country, and their holy temple; 11 and not to allow this people, which had just begun to revive, to be subjected again to blasphemous Gentiles. 12 When they had all joined in doing this, and had implored the merciful Lord continuously with weeping and fasting and prostrations for three days, Judas encouraged them and told them to stand ready.
13 After a private meeting with the elders, he decided that, before the king’s army could invade Judea and take possession of the city, the Jews should march out and settle the matter with God’s help. 
    14: Leaving the outcome to the Creator of the world, and exhorting his followers to fight nobly to death for the laws, the temple, the city, the country, and the government, he encamped near Modein. 
    15: Giving his troops the battle cry “God’s Victory,” he made a night attack on the king’s pavilion with a picked force of the bravest young men and killed about two thousand in the camp. He also stabbed the lead elephant and its rider. 
    16: Finally they withdrew in triumph, having filled the camp with terror and confusion. 
    17: Day was just breaking when this was accomplished with the help and protection of the Lord.
Treaty with Antiochus V. 
    18: The king, having had a taste of the Jews’ boldness, tried to take their positions by a stratagem. 
    19: So he marched against Beth-zur, a strong fortress of the Jews; but he was driven back, checked, and defeated. 
    20: Judas sent supplies to the men inside, 
    21: but Rhodocus, of the Jewish army, betrayed military secrets to the enemy. He was found out, arrested, and imprisoned. 
    22: The king made a second attempt by negotiating with the people of Beth-zur. After giving them his pledge and receiving theirs, he withdrew 
    23: and attacked Judas’ men. But he was defeated. Next he heard that Philip, who was left in charge of the government in Antioch, had rebelled. Dismayed, he negotiated with the Jews, submitted to their terms, and swore to observe all their rights. Having come to this agreement, he offered a sacrifice, and honored the sanctuary and the place with a generous donation. 
    24: He received Maccabeus, and left Hegemonides as governor of the territory from Ptolemais to the region of the Gerrhenes. 
    25: When he came to Ptolemais, the people of Ptolemais were angered by the peace treaty; in fact they were so indignant that they wanted to annul its provisions. 
    26: But Lysias took the platform, defended the treaty as well as he could and won them over by persuasion. After calming them and gaining their goodwill, he returned to Antioch. That is the story of the king’s attack and withdrawal.


  Chapter 14.

    1: 
1 Three years later, Judas and his companions learned that Demetrius, son of Seleucus, had sailed into the port of Tripolis with a powerful army and a fleet, 
    2: and that he had occupied the country, after doing away with Antiochus and his guardian Lysias.

    3: 
    4: 1 Three years later, Judas and his companions learned that Demetrius, son of Seleucus, had sailed into the port of Tripolis with a powerful army and a fleet, 2 and that he had occupied the country, after doing away with Antiochus and his guardian Lysias.
3 A certain Alcimus, a former high priest,[b] who had willfully incurred defilement before the time of the revolt, realized that there was no way for him to be safe and regain access to the holy altar. 4 So he went to King Demetrius around the one hundred and fifty-first year and presented him with a gold crown and a palm branch, as well as some of the customary olive branches from the temple. On that day he kept quiet. 
    5: But he found an opportunity to further his mad scheme when he was invited to the council by Demetrius and questioned about the dispositions and intentions of the Jews. He replied: 
    6: “Those Jews called Hasideans, led by Judas Maccabeus, are warmongers, who stir up sedition and keep the kingdom from enjoying peace. 
    7: For this reason, now that I am deprived of my ancestral dignity, that is to say, the high priesthood, I have come here, 
    8: first, out of my genuine concern for the king’s interests, and second, out of consideration for my own compatriots, since our entire nation is suffering no little affliction from the rash conduct of the people just mentioned. 
    9: hen you have informed yourself in detail on these matters, O king, provide for our country and its hard-pressed people with the same gracious consideration that you show toward all. 
    10: As long as Judas is around, it is impossible for the government to enjoy peace.” 
    11: When he had said this, the other Friends who were hostile to Judas quickly added fuel to Demetrius’ indignation.
Dealings with Nicanor. 
    12: The king immediately chose Nicanor, who had been in command of the elephants, and appointed him governor of Judea. He sent him off 
    13: 
    14: 1 Three years later, Judas and his companions learned that Demetrius, son of Seleucus, had sailed into the port of Tripolis with a powerful army and a fleet, 2 and that he had occupied the country, after doing away with Antiochus and his guardian Lysias.
3 A certain Alcimus, a former high priest,[b] who had willfully incurred defilement before the time of the revolt, realized that there was no way for him to be safe and regain access to the holy altar. 4 So he went to King Demetrius around the one hundred and fifty-first year and presented him with a gold crown and a palm branch, as well as some of the customary olive branches from the temple. On that day he kept quiet. 5 But he found an opportunity to further his mad scheme when he was invited to the council by Demetrius and questioned about the dispositions and intentions of the Jews. He replied: 6 “Those Jews called Hasideans, led by Judas Maccabeus,[c] are warmongers, who stir up sedition and keep the kingdom from enjoying peace. 7 For this reason, now that I am deprived of my ancestral dignity, that is to say, the high priesthood, I have come here, 8 first, out of my genuine concern for the king’s interests, and second, out of consideration for my own compatriots, since our entire nation is suffering no little affliction from the rash conduct of the people just mentioned. 9 When you have informed yourself in detail on these matters, O king, provide for our country and its hard-pressed people with the same gracious consideration that you show toward all. 10 As long as Judas is around, it is impossible for the government to enjoy peace.” 11 When he had said this, the other Friends who were hostile to Judas quickly added fuel to Demetrius’ indignation.
Dealings with Nicanor. 12 The king immediately chose Nicanor, who had been in command of the elephants, and appointed him governor of Judea. He sent him off 13 with orders to put Judas to death, to disperse his followers, and to set up Alcimus as high priest of the great temple. 14 The Gentiles from Judea, who had fled before Judas, flocked to Nicanor, thinking that the misfortunes and calamities of the Jews would mean prosperity for themselves.

    15: When the Jews heard of Nicanor’s coming, and that the Gentiles were rallying to him, they sprinkled themselves with earth and prayed to him who established his people forever, and who always comes to the aid of his heritage by manifesting himself. 
    16: At their leader’s command, they set out at once from there and came upon the enemy at the village of Adasa. 
    17: Judas’ brother Simon had engaged Nicanor, but he suffered a slight setback because of the sudden appearance of the enemy.

    18: However, when Nicanor heard of the valor of Judas and his companions, and the great courage with which they fought for their country, he shrank from deciding the issue by bloodshed. 
    19: So he sent Posidonius, Theodotus and Mattathias to exchange pledges of friendship. 
    20: After a long discussion of the terms, each leader communicated them to his troops; and when general agreement was expressed, they assented to the treaty. 
    21: A day was set on which the leaders would meet by themselves. From each side a chariot came forward, and thrones were set in place. 
    22: Judas had posted armed men in readiness at strategic points for fear that the enemy might suddenly commit some treachery. But the conference was held in the proper way.

    23: Nicanor stayed on in Jerusalem, where he did nothing out of place. He disbanded the throngs of people who gathered around him; 
    24: and he always kept Judas in his company, for he felt affection for the man. 
    25: He urged him to marry and have children; so Judas married and settled into an ordinary life.
Nicanor’s Threat Against Judas. 
    26: When Alcimus saw their mutual goodwill, he took the treaty that had been made, went to Demetrius, and said that Nicanor was plotting against the government, for he had appointed Judas, that conspirator against the kingdom, as his successor. 
    27: Stirred up by the villain’s slander, the king became enraged. He wrote to Nicanor, stating that he was displeased with the treaty, and ordering him to send Maccabeus at once as a prisoner to Antioch. 
    28: When this message reached Nicanor he was dismayed and troubled at the thought of annulling his agreement with a man who had done no wrong. 
    29: However, there was no way of opposing the king, so he watched for an opportunity to carry out this order by a stratagem. 
    30: But Maccabeus, noticing that Nicanor was more harsh in his dealings with him, and acting with unaccustomed rudeness when they met, concluded that this harshness was not a good sign. So he gathered together not a few of his men, and went into hiding from Nicanor.

    31: When Nicanor realized that he had been cleverly outwitted by the man, he went to the great and holy temple, at a time when the priests were offering the customary sacrifices, and ordered them to surrender Judas. 
    32: As they declared under oath that they did not know where the man they sought was, 
    33: he stretched out his right arm toward the temple and swore this oath: “If you do not hand Judas over to me as prisoner, I will level this shrine of God to the ground; I will tear down the altar, and erect here a splendid temple to Dionysus.”

    34: With these words he went away. The priests stretched out their hands toward heaven, calling upon the unfailing defender of our nation in these words: 
    35: “Lord of all, though you are in need of nothing, you were pleased to have a temple for your dwelling place among us. 
    36: Therefore, Holy One, Lord of all holiness, preserve forever undefiled this house, which has been so recently purified.”
Martyrdom of Razis. 
    37: A certain Razis, one of the elders of Jerusalem, was denounced to Nicanor as a patriot. A man highly regarded, he was called a father of the Jews because of his goodwill toward them. 
    38: In the days before the revolt, he had been convicted of being a Jew, and had risked body and soul in his ardent zeal for Judaism. 
    39: Nicanor, to show his disdain for the Jews, sent more than five hundred soldiers to arrest him. 
    40: He thought that by arresting that man he would deal the Jews a hard blow.

    41: But when the troops, on the point of capturing the tower, were forcing the outer gate and calling for fire to set the door ablaze, Razis, now caught on all sides, turned his sword against himself, 
    42: preferring to die nobly rather than fall into the hands of vile men and suffer outrages unworthy of his noble birth. 
    43: In the excitement of the struggle he failed to strike exactly. So while the troops rushed in through the doors, he gallantly ran up to the top of the wall and courageously threw himself down into the crowd. 
    44: But as they quickly drew back and left an opening, he fell into the middle of the empty space. 
    45: Still breathing, and inflamed with anger, he got up and ran through the crowd, with blood gushing from his frightful wounds. Then, standing on a steep rock, 
    46: as he lost the last of his blood, he tore out his entrails and flung them with both hands into the crowd, calling upon the Lord of life and of spirit to give these back to him again. Such was the manner of his death.


  Chapter 15.

    1: 
Nicanor’s Arrogance. 1 When Nicanor learned that Judas and his companions were in the territory of Samaria, he decided he could attack them in complete safety on the day of rest. 
    2: The Jews who were forced to accompany him pleaded, “Do not massacre them so savagely and barbarously, but show respect for the day which the All-seeing has exalted with holiness above all other days.” 
    3: At this the thrice-accursed wretch asked if there was a ruler in heaven who prescribed the keeping of the sabbath day. 
    4: 
    5: Nicanor’s Arrogance. 1 When Nicanor learned that Judas and his companions were in the territory of Samaria, he decided he could attack them in complete safety on the day of rest. 2 The Jews who were forced to accompany him pleaded, “Do not massacre them so savagely and barbarously, but show respect for the day which the All-seeing has exalted with holiness above all other days.” 3 At this the thrice-accursed wretch asked if there was a ruler in heaven who prescribed the keeping of the sabbath day. 4 They replied, “It is the living Lord, the ruler in heaven, who commands the observance of the sabbath day.” 5 Then he said, “I, the ruler on earth, command you to take up arms and carry out the king’s business.” Nevertheless he did not succeed in carrying out his cruel plan.

    6: In his utter boastfulness and arrogance Nicanor had determined to erect a public victory monument over Judas and his companions. 
    7: But Maccabeus remained confident, fully convinced that he would receive help from the Lord. 
    8: He urged his men not to fear the attack of the Gentiles, but mindful of the help they had received in the past from Heaven, to expect now the victory that would be given them by the Almighty. 
    9: y encouraging them with words from the law and the prophets, and by reminding them of the battles they had already won, he filled them with fresh enthusiasm. 
    10: Having stirred up their courage, he gave his orders and pointed out at the same time the perfidy of the Gentiles and their violation of oaths. 
    11: When he had armed each of them, not so much with the security of shield and spear as with the encouragement of noble words, he cheered them all by relating a dream, a kind of waking vision, worthy of belief.

    12: What he saw was this: Onias, the former high priest, a noble and good man, modest in bearing, gentle in manner, distinguished in speech, and trained from childhood in all that belongs to excellence, was praying with outstretched arms for the whole Jewish community. 
    13: Then in the same way another man appeared, distinguished by his white hair and dignity, and with an air of wondrous and majestic authority. 
    14: 
    15: Nicanor’s Arrogance. 1 When Nicanor learned that Judas and his companions were in the territory of Samaria, he decided he could attack them in complete safety on the day of rest. 2 The Jews who were forced to accompany him pleaded, “Do not massacre them so savagely and barbarously, but show respect for the day which the All-seeing has exalted with holiness above all other days.” 3 At this the thrice-accursed wretch asked if there was a ruler in heaven who prescribed the keeping of the sabbath day. 4 They replied, “It is the living Lord, the ruler in heaven, who commands the observance of the sabbath day.” 5 Then he said, “I, the ruler on earth, command you to take up arms and carry out the king’s business.” Nevertheless he did not succeed in carrying out his cruel plan.
6 In his utter boastfulness and arrogance Nicanor had determined to erect a public victory monument over Judas and his companions. 7 But Maccabeus remained confident, fully convinced that he would receive help from the Lord. 8 He urged his men not to fear the attack of the Gentiles, but mindful of the help they had received in the past from Heaven, to expect now the victory that would be given them by the Almighty. 9 By encouraging them with words from the law and the prophets,[b] and by reminding them of the battles they had already won, he filled them with fresh enthusiasm. 10 Having stirred up their courage, he gave his orders and pointed out at the same time the perfidy of the Gentiles and their violation of oaths. 11 When he had armed each of them, not so much with the security of shield and spear as with the encouragement of noble words, he cheered them all by relating a dream, a kind of waking vision, worthy of belief.
12 What he saw was this: Onias, the former high priest,[c] a noble and good man, modest in bearing, gentle in manner, distinguished in speech, and trained from childhood in all that belongs to excellence, was praying with outstretched arms for the whole Jewish community. 13 Then in the same way another man appeared, distinguished by his white hair and dignity, and with an air of wondrous and majestic authority. 14 Onias then said of him, “This is a man[d] who loves his fellow Jews and fervently prays for the people and the holy city—the prophet of God, Jeremiah.” 15 Stretching out his right hand, Jeremiah presented a gold sword to Judas. As he gave it to him he said, 
    16: “Accept this holy sword as a gift from God; with it you shall shatter your adversaries.”

    17: Encouraged by Judas’ words, so noble and capable of instilling valor and stirring young hearts to courage, they determined not merely to march, but to charge gallantly and decide the issue by hand-to-hand combat with the utmost courage, since city, sanctuary and temple were in danger. 
    18: They were not so much concerned about wives and children, or family and relations; their first and foremost fear was for the consecrated sanctuary. 
    19: Those who were left in the city suffered no less an agony, anxious as they were about the battle in the open country. 
    20: Everyone now awaited the decisive moment. The enemy were already drawing near with their troops drawn up in battle line, their beasts placed in strategic positions, and their cavalry stationed on the flanks.
Defeat of Nicanor. 
    21: Maccabeus, surveying the hosts before him, the variety of weaponry, and the fierceness of their beasts, stretched out his hands toward heaven and called upon the Lord who works wonders; for he knew that it is not weapons but the Lord’s decision that brings victory to those who deserve it. 
    22: Calling upon God, he spoke in this manner: “You, master, sent your angel in the days of King Hezekiah of Judea, and he slew a hundred and eighty-five thousand men of Sennacherib’s camp. 
    23: And now, Sovereign of the heavens, send a good angel to spread fear and trembling ahead of us. 
    24: By the might of your arm may those be struck down who have blasphemously come against your holy people!” With these words he ended his prayer.

    25: Nicanor and his troops advanced to the sound of trumpets and battle songs. 
    26: But Judas and his troops met the enemy with supplication and prayers. 
    27: Fighting with their hands and praying to God with their hearts, they laid low at least thirty-five thousand, and rejoiced greatly over this manifestation of God’s power. 
    28: When the battle was over and they were joyfully departing, they discovered Nicanor fallen there in all his armor; 
    29: so they raised tumultuous shouts in their ancestral language in praise of the divine Sovereign.

    30: Then Judas, that man who was ever in body and soul the chief defender of his fellow citizens, and had maintained from youth his affection for his compatriots, ordered Nicanor’s head and right arm up to the shoulder to be cut off and taken to Jerusalem. 
    31: When he arrived there, he assembled his compatriots, stationed the priests before the altar, and sent for those in the citadel. 
    32: He showed them the vile Nicanor’s head and the wretched blasphemer’s arm that had been boastfully stretched out against the holy dwelling of the Almighty. 
    33: He cut out the tongue of the godless Nicanor, saying he would feed it piecemeal to the birds and would hang up the other wages of his folly opposite the temple. 
    34: At this, everyone looked toward heaven and praised the Lord who manifests himself: “Blessed be the one who has preserved undefiled his own place!” 
    35: Judas hung Nicanor’s head and arm on the wall of the citadel, a clear and evident sign to all of the Lord’s help. 
    36: By public vote it was unanimously decreed never to let this day pass unobserved, but to celebrate the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, called Adar in Aramaic, the eve of Mordecai’s Day.
VII. Epilogue
Compiler’s Apology. 
    37: Since Nicanor’s doings ended in this way, with the city remaining in the possession of the Hebrews from that time on, I will bring my story to an end here too. 
    38: If it is well written and to the point, that is what I wanted; if it is poorly done and mediocre, that is the best I could do. 
    39: Just as it is unpleasant to drink wine by itself or just water, whereas wine mixed with water makes a delightful and pleasing drink, so a skillfully composed story delights the ears of those who read the work. Let this, then, be the end.


End of day 131.