Day 314:

Reading Romans, chapters ['5', '6', '7', '8']:

  Chapter 5.

    1: Therefore, since we have been justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, 
    2: through whom we have gained access  to this grace in which we stand, and we boast in hope of the glory of God. 
    3: Not only that, but we even boast of our afflictions, knowing that affliction produces endurance, 
    4: 
    5: Faith, Hope, and Love. 1 Therefore, since we have been justified by faith, we have peace[b] with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 through whom we have gained access [by faith] to this grace in which we stand, and we boast in hope of the glory of God. 3 Not only that, but we even boast of our afflictions, knowing that affliction produces endurance, 4 and endurance, proven character, and proven character, hope, 5 and hope does not disappoint, because the love of God has been poured out into our hearts through the holy Spirit that has been given to us. 
    6: For Christ, while we were still helpless, yet died at the appointed time for the ungodly. 
    7: Indeed, only with difficulty does one die for a just person, though perhaps for a good person one might even find courage to die. 
    8: But God proves his love for us in that while we were still sinners Christ died for us. 
    9: ow much more then, since we are now justified by his blood, will we be saved through him from the wrath. 
    10: Indeed, if, while we were enemies, we were reconciled to God through the death of his Son, how much more, once reconciled, will we be saved by his life. 
    11: Not only that, but we also boast of God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have now received reconciliation.
Humanity’s Sin Through Adam. 
    12: Therefore, just as through one person sin entered the world, and through sin, death, and thus death came to all, inasmuch as all sinned[e]— 
    13: for up to the time of the law, sin was in the world, though sin is not accounted when there is no law. 
    14: But death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over those who did not sin after the pattern of the trespass of Adam, who is the type of the one who was to come.
Grace and Life Through Christ. 
    15: But the gift is not like the transgression. For if by that one person’s transgression the many died, how much more did the grace of God and the gracious gift of the one person Jesus Christ overflow for the many. 
    16: And the gift is not like the result of the one person’s sinning. For after one sin there was the judgment that brought condemnation; but the gift, after many transgressions, brought acquittal. 
    17: For if, by the transgression of one person, death came to reign through that one, how much more will those who receive the abundance of grace and of the gift of justification come to reign in life through the one person Jesus Christ. 
    18: In conclusion, just as through one transgression condemnation came upon all, so through one righteous act acquittal and life came to all. 
    19: For just as through the disobedience of one person the many were made sinners, so through the obedience of one the many will be made righteous. 
    20: The law entered in so that transgression might increase but, where sin increased, grace overflowed all the more, 
    21: so that, as sin reigned in death, grace also might reign through justification for eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.


  Chapter 6.

    1: What then shall we say? Shall we persist in sin that grace may abound? Of course not! 
    2: How can we who died to sin yet live in it? 
    3: Or are you unaware that we who were baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into his death? 
    4: We were indeed buried with him through baptism into death, so that, just as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, we too might live in newness of life.

    5: 
    6: Freedom from Sin; Life in God. 1 What then shall we say? Shall we persist in sin that grace may abound? Of course not! 2 How can we who died to sin yet live in it? 3 Or are you unaware that we who were baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into his death? 4 We were indeed buried with him through baptism into death, so that, just as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, we too might live in newness of life.
5 For if we have grown into union with him through a death like his, we shall also be united with him in the resurrection. 6 We know that our old self was crucified with him, so that our sinful body might be done away with, that we might no longer be in slavery to sin. 
    7: For a dead person has been absolved from sin. 
    8: If, then, we have died with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with him. 
    9: e know that Christ, raised from the dead, dies no more; death no longer has power over him. 
    10: As to his death, he died to sin once and for all; as to his life, he lives for God. 
    11: Consequently, you too must think of yourselves as  dead to sin and living for God in Christ Jesus.

    12: Therefore, sin must not reign over your mortal bodies so that you obey their desires. 
    13: And do not present the parts of your bodies to sin as weapons for wickedness, but present yourselves to God as raised from the dead to life and the parts of your bodies to God as weapons for righteousness. 
    14: For sin is not to have any power over you, since you are not under the law but under grace.

    15: What then? Shall we sin because we are not under the law but under grace? Of course not! 
    16: Do you not know that if you present yourselves to someone as obedient slaves, you are slaves of the one you obey, either of sin, which leads to death, or of obedience, which leads to righteousness? 
    17: But thanks be to God that, although you were once slaves of sin, you have become obedient from the heart to the pattern of teaching to which you were entrusted. 
    18: Freed from sin, you have become slaves of righteousness. 
    19: I am speaking in human terms because of the weakness of your nature. For just as you presented the parts of your bodies as slaves to impurity and to lawlessness for lawlessness, so now present them as slaves to righteousness for sanctification. 
    20: For when you were slaves of sin, you were free from righteousness. 
    21: But what profit did you get then from the things of which you are now ashamed? For the end of those things is death. 
    22: But now that you have been freed from sin and have become slaves of God, the benefit that you have leads to sanctification, and its end is eternal life. 
    23: For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord.


  Chapter 7.

    1: Are you unaware, brothers (for I am speaking to people who know the law), that the law has jurisdiction over one as long as one lives? 
    2: Thus a married woman is bound by law to her living husband; but if her husband dies, she is released from the law in respect to her husband. 
    3: Consequently, while her husband is alive she will be called an adulteress if she consorts with another man. But if her husband dies she is free from that law, and she is not an adulteress if she consorts with another man.

    4: In the same way, my brothers, you also were put to death to the law through the body of Christ, so that you might belong to another, to the one who was raised from the dead in order that we might bear fruit for God. 
    5: For when we were in the flesh, our sinful passions, awakened by the law, worked in our members to bear fruit for death. 
    6: 
    7: Freedom from the Law. 1 Are you unaware, brothers (for I am speaking to people who know the law), that the law has jurisdiction over one as long as one lives? 2 Thus a married woman is bound by law to her living husband; but if her husband dies, she is released from the law in respect to her husband. 3 Consequently, while her husband is alive she will be called an adulteress if she consorts with another man. But if her husband dies she is free from that law, and she is not an adulteress if she consorts with another man.
4 In the same way, my brothers, you also were put to death to the law through the body of Christ, so that you might belong to another, to the one who was raised from the dead in order that we might bear fruit for God. 5 For when we were in the flesh, our sinful passions, awakened by the law, worked in our members to bear fruit for death. 6 But now we are released from the law, dead to what held us captive, so that we may serve in the newness of the spirit and not under the obsolete letter.
Acquaintance with Sin Through the Law. 7 [b]What then can we say? That the law is sin? Of course not![c] Yet I did not know sin except through the law, and I did not know what it is to covet except that the law said, “You shall not covet.” 
    8: But sin, finding an opportunity in the commandment, produced in me every kind of covetousness. Apart from the law sin is dead. 
    9:  once lived outside the law, but when the commandment came, sin became alive; 
    10: then I died, and the commandment that was for life turned out to be death for me. 
    11: For sin, seizing an opportunity in the commandment, deceived me and through it put me to death. 
    12: So then the law is holy, and the commandment is holy and righteous and good.
Sin and Death. 
    13: Did the good, then, become death for me? Of course not! Sin, in order that it might be shown to be sin, worked death in me through the good, so that sin might become sinful beyond measure through the commandment. 
    14: We know that the law is spiritual; but I am carnal, sold into slavery to sin. 
    15: What I do, I do not understand. For I do not do what I want, but I do what I hate. 
    16: Now if I do what I do not want, I concur that the law is good. 
    17: So now it is no longer I who do it, but sin that dwells in me. 
    18: For I know that good does not dwell in me, that is, in my flesh. The willing is ready at hand, but doing the good is not. 
    19: For I do not do the good I want, but I do the evil I do not want. 
    20: Now if  do what I do not want, it is no longer I who do it, but sin that dwells in me. 
    21: So, then, I discover the principle that when I want to do right, evil is at hand. 
    22: For I take delight in the law of God, in my inner self, 
    23: but I see in my members another principle at war with the law of my mind, taking me captive to the law of sin that dwells in my members. 
    24: Miserable one that I am! Who will deliver me from this mortal body? 
    25: Thanks be to God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Therefore, I myself, with my mind, serve the law of God but, with my flesh, the law of sin.


  Chapter 8.

    1: Hence, now there is no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus. 
    2: For the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus has freed you from the law of sin and death. 
    3: For what the law, weakened by the flesh, was powerless to do, this God has done: by sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh and for the sake of sin, he condemned sin in the flesh, 
    4: so that the righteous decree of the law might be fulfilled in us, who live not according to the flesh but according to the spirit. 
    5: For those who live according to the flesh are concerned with the things of the flesh, but those who live according to the spirit with the things of the spirit. 
    6: The concern of the flesh is death, but the concern of the spirit is life and peace. 
    7: 
    8: The Flesh and the Spirit. 1 Hence, now there is no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus. 2 For the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus has freed you from the law of sin and death. 3 For what the law, weakened by the flesh, was powerless to do, this God has done: by sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh and for the sake of sin, he condemned sin in the flesh, 4 so that the righteous decree of the law might be fulfilled in us, who live not according to the flesh but according to the spirit. 5 For those who live according to the flesh are concerned with the things of the flesh, but those who live according to the spirit with the things of the spirit. 6 The concern of the flesh is death, but the concern of the spirit is life and peace. 7 For the concern of the flesh is hostility toward God; it does not submit to the law of God, nor can it; 8 and those who are in the flesh cannot please God. 
    9: ut you are not in the flesh; on the contrary, you are in the spirit, if only the Spirit of God dwells in you. Whoever does not have the Spirit of Christ does not belong to him. 
    10: But if Christ is in you, although the body is dead because of sin, the spirit is alive because of righteousness. 
    11: If the Spirit of the one who raised Jesus from the dead dwells in you, the one who raised Christ from the dead will give life to your mortal bodies also, through his Spirit that dwells in you. 
    12: Consequently, brothers, we are not debtors to the flesh, to live according to the flesh. 
    13: For if you live according to the flesh, you will die, but if by the spirit you put to death the deeds of the body, you will live.
Children of God Through Adoption. 
    14: For those who are led by the Spirit of God are children of God. 
    15: For you did not receive a spirit of slavery to fall back into fear, but you received a spirit of adoption, through which we cry, “Abba, Father!” 
    16: The Spirit itself bears witness with our spirit that we are children of God, 
    17: and if children, then heirs, heirs of God and joint heirs with Christ, if only we suffer with him so that we may also be glorified with him.
Destiny of Glory. 
    18: I consider that the sufferings of this present time are as nothing compared with the glory to be revealed for us. 
    19: For creation awaits with eager expectation the revelation of the children of God; 
    20: for creation was made subject to futility, not of its own accord but because of the one who subjected it, in hope 
    21: that creation itself would be set free from slavery to corruption and share in the glorious freedom of the children of God. 
    22: We know that all creation is groaning in labor pains even until now; 
    23: and not only that, but we ourselves, who have the firstfruits of the Spirit, we also groan within ourselves as we wait for adoption, the redemption of our bodies. 
    24: For in hope we were saved. Now hope that sees for itself is not hope. For who hopes for what one sees? 
    25: But if we hope for what we do not see, we wait with endurance.

    26: In the same way, the Spirit too comes to the aid of our weakness; for we do not know how to pray as we ought, but the Spirit itself intercedes with inexpressible groanings. 
    27: And the one who searches hearts knows what is the intention of the Spirit, because it intercedes for the holy ones according to God’s will.
God’s Indomitable Love in Christ. 
    28: We know that all things work for good for those who love God,[f] who are called according to his purpose. 
    29: For those he foreknew he also predestined to be conformed to the image of his Son, so that he might be the firstborn among many brothers. 
    30: And those he predestined he also called; and those he called he also justified; and those he justified he also glorified.

    31: What then shall we say to this? If God is for us, who can be against us? 
    32: He who did not spare his own Son but handed him over for us all, how will he not also give us everything else along with him? 
    33: Who will bring a charge against God’s chosen ones? It is God who acquits us. 
    34: Who will condemn? It is Christ  who died, rather, was raised, who also is at the right hand of God, who indeed intercedes for us. 
    35: What will separate us from the love of Christ? Will anguish, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or the sword? 
    36: As it is written:
“For your sake we are being slain all the day;
    we are looked upon as sheep to be slaughtered.”

    37: No, in all these things we conquer overwhelmingly through him who loved us. 
    38: For I am convinced that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor present things, nor future things, nor powers, 
    39: nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature will be able to separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord.


End of day 314.