Day 289:

Reading Matthew, chapters ['25', '26', '27', '28']:

  Chapter 25.

    1: 
    2: 
The Parable of the Ten Virgins. 1 “Then[b] the kingdom of heaven will be like ten virgins who took their lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom. 2 [c]Five of them were foolish and five were wise. 
    3: The foolish ones, when taking their lamps, brought no oil with them, 
    4: 
    5: The Parable of the Ten Virgins. 1 “Then[b] the kingdom of heaven will be like ten virgins who took their lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom. 2 [c]Five of them were foolish and five were wise. 3 The foolish ones, when taking their lamps, brought no oil with them, 4 but the wise brought flasks of oil with their lamps. 5 Since the bridegroom was long delayed, they all became drowsy and fell asleep. 
    6: At midnight, there was a cry, ‘Behold, the bridegroom! Come out to meet him!’ 
    7: Then all those virgins got up and trimmed their lamps. 
    8: The foolish ones said to the wise, ‘Give us some of your oil, for our lamps are going out.’ 
    9: ut the wise ones replied, ‘No, for there may not be enough for us and you. Go instead to the merchants and buy some for yourselves.’ 
    10: While they went off to buy it, the bridegroom came and those who were ready went into the wedding feast with him. Then the door was locked. 
    11: Afterwards the other virgins came and said, ‘Lord, Lord, open the door for us!’ 
    12: But he said in reply, ‘Amen, I say to you, I do not know you.’ 
    13: Therefore, stay awake, for you know neither the day nor the hour.
The Parable of the Talents.[f] 
    14: “It will be as when a man who was going on a journey called in his servants and entrusted his possessions to them. 
    15: To one he gave five talents; to another, two; to a third, one—to each according to his ability. Then he went away. Immediately 
    16: the one who received five talents went and traded with them, and made another five. 
    17: Likewise, the one who received two made another two. 
    18: But the man who received one went off and dug a hole in the ground and buried his master’s money. 
    19: After a long time the master of those servants came back and settled accounts with them. 
    20: The one who had received five talents came forward bringing the additional five. He said, ‘Master, you gave me five talents. See, I have made five more.’ 
    21: His master said to him, ‘Well done, my good and faithful servant. Since you were faithful in small matters, I will give you great responsibilities. Come, share your master’s joy.’ 
    22:  the one who had received two talents also came forward and said, ‘Master, you gave me two talents. See, I have made two more.’ 
    23: His master said to him, ‘Well done, my good and faithful servant. Since you were faithful in small matters, I will give you great responsibilities. Come, share your master’s joy.’ 
    24: 
    25: The Parable of the Ten Virgins. 1 “Then[b] the kingdom of heaven will be like ten virgins who took their lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom. 2 [c]Five of them were foolish and five were wise. 3 The foolish ones, when taking their lamps, brought no oil with them, 4 but the wise brought flasks of oil with their lamps. 5 Since the bridegroom was long delayed, they all became drowsy and fell asleep. 6 At midnight, there was a cry, ‘Behold, the bridegroom! Come out to meet him!’ 7 Then all those virgins got up and trimmed their lamps. 8 The foolish ones said to the wise, ‘Give us some of your oil, for our lamps are going out.’ 9 But the wise ones replied, ‘No, for there may not be enough for us and you. Go instead to the merchants and buy some for yourselves.’ 10 While they went off to buy it, the bridegroom came and those who were ready went into the wedding feast with him. Then the door was locked. 11 [d]Afterwards the other virgins came and said, ‘Lord, Lord, open the door for us!’ 12 But he said in reply, ‘Amen, I say to you, I do not know you.’ 13 Therefore, stay awake,[e] for you know neither the day nor the hour.
The Parable of the Talents.[f] 14 “It will be as when a man who was going on a journey[g] called in his servants and entrusted his possessions to them. 15 To one he gave five talents;[h] to another, two; to a third, one—to each according to his ability. Then he went away. Immediately 16 the one who received five talents went and traded with them, and made another five. 17 Likewise, the one who received two made another two. 18 [i]But the man who received one went off and dug a hole in the ground and buried his master’s money. 19 After a long time the master of those servants came back and settled accounts with them. 20 The one who had received five talents came forward bringing the additional five.[j] He said, ‘Master, you gave me five talents. See, I have made five more.’ 21 His master said to him, ‘Well done, my good and faithful servant. Since you were faithful in small matters, I will give you great responsibilities. Come, share your master’s joy.’ 22 [Then] the one who had received two talents also came forward and said, ‘Master, you gave me two talents. See, I have made two more.’ 23 His master said to him, ‘Well done, my good and faithful servant. Since you were faithful in small matters, I will give you great responsibilities. Come, share your master’s joy.’ 24 Then the one who had received the one talent came forward and said, ‘Master, I knew you were a demanding person, harvesting where you did not plant and gathering where you did not scatter; 25 so out of fear I went off and buried your talent in the ground. Here it is back.’ 
    26: His master said to him in reply, ‘You wicked, lazy servant! So you knew that I harvest where I did not plant and gather where I did not scatter? 
    27: Should you not then have put my money in the bank so that I could have got it back with interest on my return? 
    28: Now then! Take the talent from him and give it to the one with ten. 
    29: For to everyone who has, more will be given and he will grow rich; but from the one who has not, even what he has will be taken away. 
    30: And throw this useless servant into the darkness outside, where there will be wailing and grinding of teeth.’
The Judgment of the Nations.[n] 
    31: “When the Son of Man comes in his glory, and all the angels with him, he will sit upon his glorious throne, 
    32: and all the nations will be assembled before him. And he will separate them one from another, as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats. 
    33: He will place the sheep on his right and the goats on his left. 
    34: Then the king will say to those on his right, ‘Come, you who are blessed by my Father. Inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. 
    35: For I was hungry and you gave me food, I was thirsty and you gave me drink, a stranger and you welcomed me, 
    36: naked and you clothed me, ill and you cared for me, in prison and you visited me.’ 
    37: Then the righteous will answer him and say, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry and feed you, or thirsty and give you drink? 
    38: When did we see you a stranger and welcome you, or naked and clothe you? 
    39: When did we see you ill or in prison, and visit you?’ 
    40: And the king will say to them in reply, ‘Amen, I say to you, whatever you did for one of these least brothers of mine, you did for me.’ 
    41: Then he will say to those on his left, ‘Depart from me, you accursed, into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his angels. 
    42: For I was hungry and you gave me no food, I was thirsty and you gave me no drink, 
    43: a stranger and you gave me no welcome, naked and you gave me no clothing, ill and in prison, and you did not care for me.’ 
    44: Then they will answer and say, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry or thirsty or a stranger or naked or ill or in prison, and not minister to your needs?’ 
    45: He will answer them, ‘Amen, I say to you, what you did not do for one of these least ones, you did not do for me.’ 
    46: And these will go off to eternal punishment, but the righteous to eternal life.”


  Chapter 26.

    1: 
    2: 
The Conspiracy Against Jesus. 1 When Jesus finished all these words,[b] he said to his disciples, 2 “You know that in two days’ time it will be Passover, and the Son of Man will be handed over to be crucified.” 
    3: Then the chief priests and the elders of the people assembled in the palace of the high priest, who was called Caiaphas, 
    4: and they consulted together to arrest Jesus by treachery and put him to death. 
    5: 
    6: The Conspiracy Against Jesus. 1 When Jesus finished all these words,[b] he said to his disciples, 2 “You know that in two days’ time it will be Passover, and the Son of Man will be handed over to be crucified.” 3 [c]Then the chief priests and the elders of the people assembled in the palace of the high priest, who was called Caiaphas, 4 and they consulted together to arrest Jesus by treachery and put him to death. 5 But they said, “Not during the festival,[d] that there may not be a riot among the people.”
The Anointing at Bethany.[e] 6 Now when Jesus was in Bethany in the house of Simon the leper, 
    7: a woman came up to him with an alabaster jar of costly perfumed oil, and poured it on his head while he was reclining at table. 
    8: When the disciples saw this, they were indignant and said, “Why this waste? 
    9: t could have been sold for much, and the money given to the poor.” 
    10: Since Jesus knew this, he said to them, “Why do you make trouble for the woman? She has done a good thing for me. 
    11: The poor you will always have with you; but you will not always have me. 
    12: In pouring this perfumed oil upon my body, she did it to prepare me for burial. 
    13: Amen, I say to you, wherever this gospel is proclaimed in the whole world, what she has done will be spoken of, in memory of her.”
The Betrayal by Judas. 
    14: Then one of the Twelve, who was called Judas Iscariot, went to the chief priests 
    15: and said, “What are you willing to give me if I hand him over to you?” They paid him thirty pieces of silver, 
    16: and from that time on he looked for an opportunity to hand him over.
Preparations for the Passover. 
    17: On the first day of the Feast of Unleavened Bread, the disciples approached Jesus and said, “Where do you want us to prepare for you to eat the Passover?” 
    18: He said, “Go into the city to a certain man and tell him, ‘The teacher says, “My appointed time draws near; in your house I shall celebrate the Passover with my disciples.”’” 
    19: The disciples then did as Jesus had ordered, and prepared the Passover.
The Betrayer. 
    20: When it was evening, he reclined at table with the Twelve. 
    21: And while they were eating, he said, “Amen, I say to you, one of you will betray me.” 
    22: Deeply distressed at this, they began to say to him one after another, “Surely it is not I, Lord?” 
    23: He said in reply, “He who has dipped his hand into the dish with me is the one who will betray me. 
    24: The Son of Man indeed goes, as it is written of him, but woe to that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed. It would be better for that man if he had never been born.” 
    25: 
    26: The Conspiracy Against Jesus. 1 When Jesus finished all these words,[b] he said to his disciples, 2 “You know that in two days’ time it will be Passover, and the Son of Man will be handed over to be crucified.” 3 [c]Then the chief priests and the elders of the people assembled in the palace of the high priest, who was called Caiaphas, 4 and they consulted together to arrest Jesus by treachery and put him to death. 5 But they said, “Not during the festival,[d] that there may not be a riot among the people.”
The Anointing at Bethany.[e] 6 Now when Jesus was in Bethany in the house of Simon the leper, 7 a woman came up to him with an alabaster jar of costly perfumed oil, and poured it on his head while he was reclining at table. 8 When the disciples saw this, they were indignant and said, “Why this waste? 9 It could have been sold for much, and the money given to the poor.” 10 Since Jesus knew this, he said to them, “Why do you make trouble for the woman? She has done a good thing for me. 11 The poor you will always have with you; but you will not always have me. 12 [f]In pouring this perfumed oil upon my body, she did it to prepare me for burial. 13 Amen, I say to you, wherever this gospel is proclaimed in the whole world, what she has done will be spoken of, in memory of her.”
The Betrayal by Judas. 14 Then one of the Twelve, who was called Judas Iscariot,[g] went to the chief priests 15 [h]and said, “What are you willing to give me if I hand him over to you?” They paid him thirty pieces of silver, 16 and from that time on he looked for an opportunity to hand him over.
Preparations for the Passover. 17 On the first day of the Feast of Unleavened Bread,[i] the disciples approached Jesus and said, “Where do you want us to prepare for you to eat the Passover?” 18 [j]He said, “Go into the city to a certain man and tell him, ‘The teacher says, “My appointed time draws near; in your house I shall celebrate the Passover with my disciples.”’” 19 The disciples then did as Jesus had ordered, and prepared the Passover.
The Betrayer. 20 When it was evening, he reclined at table with the Twelve. 21 And while they were eating, he said, “Amen, I say to you, one of you will betray me.”[k] 22 Deeply distressed at this, they began to say to him one after another, “Surely it is not I, Lord?” 23 He said in reply, “He who has dipped his hand into the dish with me is the one who will betray me. 24 [l]The Son of Man indeed goes, as it is written of him, but woe to that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed. It would be better for that man if he had never been born.” 25 [m]Then Judas, his betrayer, said in reply, “Surely it is not I, Rabbi?” He answered, “You have said so.”
The Lord’s Supper. 26 [n]While they were eating, Jesus took bread, said the blessing, broke it, and giving it to his disciples said, “Take and eat; this is my body.”[o] 
    27: Then he took a cup, gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, “Drink from it, all of you, 
    28: for this is my blood of the covenant, which will be shed on behalf of many for the forgiveness of sins. 
    29: I tell you, from now on I shall not drink this fruit of the vine until the day when I drink it with you new in the kingdom of my Father.” 
    30: Then, after singing a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives.
Peter’s Denial Foretold. 
    31: Then Jesus said to them, “This night all of you will have your faith in me shaken, for it is written:
‘I will strike the shepherd,
    and the sheep of the flock will be dispersed’;

    32: but after I have been raised up, I shall go before you to Galilee.” 
    33: Peter said to him in reply, “Though all may have their faith in you shaken, mine will never be.” 
    34: Jesus said to him, “Amen, I say to you, this very night before the cock crows, you will deny me three times.” 
    35: Peter said to him, “Even though I should have to die with you, I will not deny you.” And all the disciples spoke likewise.
The Agony in the Garden. 
    36: Then Jesus came with them to a place called Gethsemane,[v] and he said to his disciples, “Sit here while I go over there and pray.” 
    37: He took along Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, and began to feel sorrow and distress. 
    38: Then he said to them, “My soul is sorrowful even to death. Remain here and keep watch with me.” 
    39: He advanced a little and fell prostrate in prayer, saying, “My Father, if it is possible, let this cup pass from me; yet, not as I will, but as you will.” 
    40: When he returned to his disciples he found them asleep. He said to Peter, “So you could not keep watch with me for one hour? 
    41: Watch and pray that you may not undergo the test. The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.” 
    42: Withdrawing a second time, he prayed again, “My Father, if it is not possible that this cup pass without my drinking it, your will be done!” 
    43: Then he returned once more and found them asleep, for they could not keep their eyes open. 
    44: He left them and withdrew again and prayed a third time, saying the same thing again. 
    45: Then he returned to his disciples and said to them, “Are you still sleeping and taking your rest? Behold, the hour is at hand when the Son of Man is to be handed over to sinners. 
    46: Get up, let us go. Look, my betrayer is at hand.”
The Betrayal and Arrest of Jesus. 
    47: While he was still speaking, Judas, one of the Twelve, arrived, accompanied by a large crowd, with swords and clubs, who had come from the chief priests and the elders of the people. 
    48: His betrayer had arranged a sign with them, saying, “The man I shall kiss is the one; arrest him.” 
    49: Immediately he went over to Jesus and said, “Hail, Rabbi!” and he kissed him. 
    50: Jesus answered him, “Friend, do what you have come for.” Then stepping forward they laid hands on Jesus and arrested him. 
    51: And behold, one of those who accompanied Jesus put his hand to his sword, drew it, and struck the high priest’s servant, cutting off his ear. 
    52: Then Jesus said to him, “Put your sword back into its sheath, for all who take the sword will perish by the sword. 
    53: Do you think that I cannot call upon my Father and he will not provide me at this moment with more than twelve legions of angels? 
    54: But then how would the scriptures be fulfilled which say that it must come to pass in this way?” 
    55: At that hour Jesus said to the crowds, “Have you come out as against a robber, with swords and clubs to seize me? Day after day I sat teaching in the temple area, yet you did not arrest me. 
    56: But all this has come to pass that the writings of the prophets may be fulfilled.” Then all the disciples left him and fled.
Jesus Before the Sanhedrin. 
    57: Those who had arrested Jesus led him away to Caiaphas the high priest, where the scribes and the elders were assembled. 
    58: Peter was following him at a distance as far as the high priest’s courtyard, and going inside he sat down with the servants to see the outcome. 
    59: The chief priests and the entire Sanhedrin kept trying to obtain false testimony against Jesus in order to put him to death, 
    60: but they found none, though many false witnesses came forward. Finally two came forward 
    61: who stated, “This man said, ‘I can destroy the temple of God and within three days rebuild it.’” 
    62: The high priest rose and addressed him, “Have you no answer? What are these men testifying against you?” 
    63: But Jesus was silent. Then the high priest said to him, “I order you to tell us under oath before the living God whether you are the Messiah, the Son of God.” 
    64: Jesus said to him in reply, “You have said so. But I tell you:
From now on you will see ‘the Son of Man
    seated at the right hand of the Power’
    and ‘coming on the clouds of heaven.’”

    65: Then the high priest tore his robes and said, “He has blasphemed! What further need have we of witnesses? You have now heard the blasphemy; 
    66: what is your opinion?” They said in reply, “He deserves to die!” 
    67: Then they spat in his face and struck him, while some slapped him, 
    68: saying, “Prophesy for us, Messiah: who is it that struck you?”
Peter’s Denial of Jesus. 
    69: Now Peter was sitting outside in the courtyard. One of the maids came over to him and said, “You too were with Jesus the Galilean.” 
    70: But he denied it in front of everyone, saying, “I do not know what you are talking about!” 
    71: As he went out to the gate, another girl saw him and said to those who were there, “This man was with Jesus the Nazorean.” 
    72: Again he denied it with an oath, “I do not know the man!” 
    73: A little later the bystanders came over and said to Peter, “Surely you too are one of them; even your speech gives you away.” 
    74: At that he began to curse and to swear, “I do not know the man.” And immediately a cock crowed. 
    75: Then Peter remembered the word that Jesus had spoken: “Before the cock crows you will deny me three times.” He went out and began to weep bitterly.


  Chapter 27.

    1: 
    2: 
Jesus Before Pilate. 1 When it was morning, all the chief priests and the elders of the people took counsel[b] against Jesus to put him to death. 2 They bound him, led him away, and handed him over to Pilate, the governor.
The Death of Judas. 
    3: Then Judas, his betrayer, seeing that Jesus had been condemned, deeply regretted what he had done. He returned the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders, 
    4: saying, “I have sinned in betraying innocent blood.” They said, “What is that to us? Look to it yourself.” 
    5: Flinging the money into the temple, he departed and went off and hanged himself. 
    6: 
    7: Jesus Before Pilate. 1 When it was morning, all the chief priests and the elders of the people took counsel[b] against Jesus to put him to death. 2 They bound him, led him away, and handed him over to Pilate, the governor.
The Death of Judas. 3 Then Judas, his betrayer, seeing that Jesus had been condemned, deeply regretted what he had done. He returned the thirty pieces of silver[c] to the chief priests and elders, 4 saying, “I have sinned in betraying innocent blood.” They said, “What is that to us? Look to it yourself.” 5 [d]Flinging the money into the temple, he departed and went off and hanged himself. 6 The chief priests gathered up the money, but said, “It is not lawful to deposit this in the temple treasury, for it is the price of blood.” 7 After consultation, they used it to buy the potter’s field as a burial place for foreigners. 
    8: That is why that field even today is called the Field of Blood. 
    9: hen was fulfilled what had been said through Jeremiah the prophet, “And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the value of a man with a price on his head, a price set by some of the Israelites, 
    10: and they paid it out for the potter’s field just as the Lord had commanded me.”
Jesus Questioned by Pilate. 
    11: Now Jesus stood before the governor, and he questioned him, “Are you the king of the Jews?” Jesus said, “You say so.” 
    12: And when he was accused by the chief priests and elders, he made no answer. 
    13: Then Pilate said to him, “Do you not hear how many things they are testifying against you?” 
    14: But he did not answer him one word, so that the governor was greatly amazed.
The Sentence of Death. 
    15: Now on the occasion of the feast the governor was accustomed to release to the crowd one prisoner whom they wished. 
    16: And at that time they had a notorious prisoner called [Jesus] Barabbas. 
    17: So when they had assembled, Pilate said to them, “Which one do you want me to release to you,  Barabbas, or Jesus called Messiah?” 
    18: For he knew that it was out of envy that they had handed him over. 
    19: While he was still seated on the bench, his wife sent him a message, “Have nothing to do with that righteous man. I suffered much in a dream today because of him.” 
    20: The chief priests and the elders persuaded the crowds to ask for Barabbas but to destroy Jesus. 
    21: The governor said to them in reply, “Which of the two do you want me to release to you?” They answered, “Barabbas!” 
    22: Pilate said to them, “Then what shall I do with Jesus called Messiah?” They all said, “Let him be crucified!” 
    23: But he said, “Why? What evil has he done?” They only shouted the louder, “Let him be crucified!” 
    24: When Pilate saw that he was not succeeding at all, but that a riot was breaking out instead, he took water and washed his hands in the sight of the crowd, saying, “I am innocent of this man’s blood. Look to it yourselves.” 
    25: And the whole people said in reply, “His blood be upon us and upon our children.” 
    26: 
    27: Jesus Before Pilate. 1 When it was morning, all the chief priests and the elders of the people took counsel[b] against Jesus to put him to death. 2 They bound him, led him away, and handed him over to Pilate, the governor.
The Death of Judas. 3 Then Judas, his betrayer, seeing that Jesus had been condemned, deeply regretted what he had done. He returned the thirty pieces of silver[c] to the chief priests and elders, 4 saying, “I have sinned in betraying innocent blood.” They said, “What is that to us? Look to it yourself.” 5 [d]Flinging the money into the temple, he departed and went off and hanged himself. 6 The chief priests gathered up the money, but said, “It is not lawful to deposit this in the temple treasury, for it is the price of blood.” 7 After consultation, they used it to buy the potter’s field as a burial place for foreigners. 8 That is why that field even today is called the Field of Blood. 9 Then was fulfilled what had been said through Jeremiah the prophet,[e] “And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the value of a man with a price on his head, a price set by some of the Israelites, 10 and they paid it out for the potter’s field just as the Lord had commanded me.”
Jesus Questioned by Pilate. 11 Now Jesus stood before the governor, and he questioned him, “Are you the king of the Jews?”[f] Jesus said, “You say so.” 12 And when he was accused by the chief priests and elders,[g] he made no answer. 13 Then Pilate said to him, “Do you not hear how many things they are testifying against you?” 14 But he did not answer him one word, so that the governor was greatly amazed.
The Sentence of Death. 15 [h]Now on the occasion of the feast the governor was accustomed to release to the crowd one prisoner whom they wished. 16 [i]And at that time they had a notorious prisoner called [Jesus] Barabbas. 17 So when they had assembled, Pilate said to them, “Which one do you want me to release to you, [Jesus] Barabbas, or Jesus called Messiah?” 18 [j]For he knew that it was out of envy that they had handed him over. 19 [k]While he was still seated on the bench, his wife sent him a message, “Have nothing to do with that righteous man. I suffered much in a dream today because of him.” 20 The chief priests and the elders persuaded the crowds to ask for Barabbas but to destroy Jesus. 21 The governor said to them in reply, “Which of the two do you want me to release to you?” They answered, “Barabbas!” 22 [l]Pilate said to them, “Then what shall I do with Jesus called Messiah?” They all said, “Let him be crucified!” 23 But he said, “Why? What evil has he done?” They only shouted the louder, “Let him be crucified!” 24 [m]When Pilate saw that he was not succeeding at all, but that a riot was breaking out instead, he took water and washed his hands in the sight of the crowd, saying, “I am innocent of this man’s blood. Look to it yourselves.” 25 And the whole people said in reply, “His blood be upon us and upon our children.” 26 Then he released Barabbas to them, but after he had Jesus scourged,[n] he handed him over to be crucified.
Mockery by the Soldiers. 27 Then the soldiers of the governor took Jesus inside the praetorium[o] and gathered the whole cohort around him. 
    28: They stripped off his clothes and threw a scarlet military cloak about him. 
    29: Weaving a crown out of thorns, they placed it on his head, and a reed in his right hand. And kneeling before him, they mocked him, saying, “Hail, King of the Jews!” 
    30: They spat upon him and took the reed and kept striking him on the head. 
    31: And when they had mocked him, they stripped him of the cloak, dressed him in his own clothes, and led him off to crucify him.
The Way of the Cross. 
    32: As they were going out, they met a Cyrenian named Simon; this man they pressed into service to carry his cross.
The Crucifixion. 
    33: And when they came to a place called Golgotha (which means Place of the Skull), 
    34: they gave Jesus wine to drink mixed with gall. But when he had tasted it, he refused to drink. 
    35: After they had crucified him, they divided his garments by casting lots; 
    36: then they sat down and kept watch over him there. 
    37: And they placed over his head the written charge against him: This is Jesus, the King of the Jews. 
    38: Two revolutionaries were crucified with him, one on his right and the other on his left. 
    39: Those passing by reviled him, shaking their heads 
    40: and saying, “You who would destroy the temple and rebuild it in three days, save yourself, if you are the Son of God,  come down from the cross!” 
    41: Likewise the chief priests with the scribes and elders mocked him and said, 
    42: “He saved others; he cannot save himself. So he is the king of Israel! Let him come down from the cross now, and we will believe in him. 
    43: He trusted in God; let him deliver him now if he wants him. For he said, ‘I am the Son of God.’” 
    44: The revolutionaries who were crucified with him also kept abusing him in the same way.
The Death of Jesus. 
    45: From noon onward, darkness came over the whole land until three in the afternoon. 
    46: And about three o’clock Jesus cried out in a loud voice, “Eli, Eli, lema sabachthani?” which means, “My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?” 
    47: Some of the bystanders who heard it said, “This one is calling for Elijah.” 
    48: Immediately one of them ran to get a sponge; he soaked it in wine, and putting it on a reed, gave it to him to drink. 
    49: But the rest said, “Wait, let us see if Elijah comes to save him.” 
    50: But Jesus cried out again in a loud voice, and gave up his spirit. 
    51: And behold, the veil of the sanctuary was torn in two from top to bottom. The earth quaked, rocks were split, 
    52: tombs were opened, and the bodies of many saints who had fallen asleep were raised. 
    53: And coming forth from their tombs after his resurrection, they entered the holy city and appeared to many. 
    54: The centurion and the men with him who were keeping watch over Jesus feared greatly when they saw the earthquake and all that was happening, and they said, “Truly, this was the Son of God!” 
    55: There were many women there, looking on from a distance, who had followed Jesus from Galilee, ministering to him. 
    56: Among them were Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of James and Joseph, and the mother of the sons of Zebedee.
The Burial of Jesus. 
    57: When it was evening, there came a rich man from Arimathea named Joseph, who was himself a disciple of Jesus. 
    58: He went to Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus; then Pilate ordered it to be handed over. 
    59: Taking the body, Joseph wrapped it  clean linen 
    60: and laid it in his new tomb that he had hewn in the rock. Then he rolled a huge stone across the entrance to the tomb and departed. 
    61: But Mary Magdalene and the other Mary remained sitting there, facing the tomb.
The Guard at the Tomb. 
    62: The next day, the one following the day of preparation, the chief priests and the Pharisees gathered before Pilate 
    63: and said, “Sir, we remember that this impostor while still alive said, ‘After three days I will be raised up.’ 
    64: Give orders, then, that the grave be secured until the third day, lest his disciples come and steal him and say to the people, ‘He has been raised from the dead.’ This last imposture would be worse than the first.” 
    65: Pilate said to them, “The guard is yours; go secure it as best you can.” 
    66: So they went and secured the tomb by fixing a seal to the stone and setting the guard.


  Chapter 28.

    1: 
    2: 
The Resurrection of Jesus. 1 After the sabbath, as the first day of the week was dawning,[b] Mary Magdalene and the other Mary came to see the tomb. 2 [c]And behold, there was a great earthquake; for an angel of the Lord descended from heaven, approached, rolled back the stone, and sat upon it. 
    3: His appearance was like lightning and his clothing was white as snow. 
    4: The guards were shaken with fear of him and became like dead men. 
    5: Then the angel said to the women in reply, “Do not be afraid! I know that you are seeking Jesus the crucified. 
    6: He is not here, for he has been raised just as he said. Come and see the place where he lay. 
    7: 
    8: a]
The Resurrection of Jesus. 1 After the sabbath, as the first day of the week was dawning,[b] Mary Magdalene and the other Mary came to see the tomb. 2 [c]And behold, there was a great earthquake; for an angel of the Lord descended from heaven, approached, rolled back the stone, and sat upon it. 3 His appearance was like lightning and his clothing was white as snow. 4 The guards were shaken with fear of him and became like dead men. 5 Then the angel said to the women in reply, “Do not be afraid! I know that you are seeking Jesus the crucified. 6 [d]He is not here, for he has been raised just as he said. Come and see the place where he lay. 7 Then go quickly and tell his disciples, ‘He has been raised from the dead, and he is going before you to Galilee; there you will see him.’ Behold, I have told you.” 8 Then they went away quickly from the tomb, fearful yet overjoyed, and ran to announce[e] this to his disciples. 
    9: f]And behold, Jesus met them on their way and greeted them. They approached, embraced his feet, and did him homage. 
    10: Then Jesus said to them, “Do not be afraid. Go tell my brothers to go to Galilee, and there they will see me.”
The Report of the Guard. 
    11: While they were going, some of the guard went into the city and told the chief priests all that had happened. 
    12: They assembled with the elders and took counsel; then they gave a large sum of money to the soldiers, 
    13: telling them, “You are to say, ‘His disciples came by night and stole him while we were asleep.’ 
    14: And if this gets to the ears of the governor, we will satisfy  and keep you out of trouble.” 
    15: The soldiers took the money and did as they were instructed. And this story has circulated among the Jews to the present .
The Commissioning of the Disciples.[h] 
    16: The eleven disciples went to Galilee, to the mountain to which Jesus had ordered them. 
    17: When they saw him, they worshiped, but they doubted. 
    18: Then Jesus approached and said to them, “All power in heaven and on earth has been given to me. 
    19: Go, therefore, and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Spirit, 
    20: teaching them to observe all that I have commanded you. And behold, I am with you always, until the end of the age.”


End of day 289.