Day 334:

Reading 1-Timothy, chapters ['1', '2', '3', '4']:

  Chapter 1.

    1: Greeting. 1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by command of God our savior and of Christ Jesus our hope, 
    2: to Timothy, my true child in faith: grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
II. Sound Teaching
Warning Against False Doctrine. 
    3: I repeat the request I made of you when I was on my way to Macedonia, that you stay in Ephesus to instruct certain people not to teach false doctrines 
    4: or to concern themselves with myths and endless genealogies, which promote speculations rather than the plan of God that is to be received by faith. 
    5: The aim of this instruction is love from a pure heart, a good conscience, and a sincere faith. 
    6: Some people have deviated from these and turned to meaningless talk, 
    7: wanting to be teachers of the law, but without understanding either what they are saying or what they assert with such assurance.

    8: We know that the law is good, provided that one uses it as law, 
    9: ith the understanding that law is meant not for a righteous person but for the lawless and unruly, the godless and sinful, the unholy and profane, those who kill their fathers or mothers, murderers, 
    10: the unchaste, sodomites, kidnappers, liars, perjurers, and whatever else is opposed to sound teaching, 
    11: according to the glorious gospel of the blessed God, with which I have been entrusted.
Gratitude for God’s Mercy. 
    12: I am grateful to him who has strengthened me, Christ Jesus our Lord, because he considered me trustworthy in appointing me to the ministry. 
    13: I was once a blasphemer and a persecutor and an arrogant man, but I have been mercifully treated because I acted out of ignorance in my unbelief. 
    14: Indeed, the grace of our Lord has been abundant, along with the faith and love that are in Christ Jesus. 
    15: This saying is trustworthy and deserves full acceptance: Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners. Of these I am the foremost. 
    16: But for that reason I was mercifully treated, so that in me, as the foremost, Christ Jesus might display all his patience as an example for those who would come to believe in him for everlasting life. 
    17: To the king of ages, incorruptible, invisible, the only God, honor and glory forever and ever. Amen.
Responsibility of Timothy.[i] 
    18: I entrust this charge to you, Timothy, my child, in accordance with the prophetic words once spoken about you. Through them may you fight a good fight 
    19: by having faith and a good conscience. Some, by rejecting conscience, have made a shipwreck of their faith, 
    20: among them Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom I have handed over to Satan to be taught not to blaspheme.


  Chapter 2.

    1: 
    2: Prayer and Conduct. 1 First of all, then, I ask that supplications, prayers, petitions, and thanksgivings be offered for everyone, 2 for kings and for all in authority, that we may lead a quiet and tranquil life in all devotion and dignity. 
    3: This is good and pleasing to God our savior, 
    4: who wills everyone to be saved and to come to knowledge of the truth.

    5: 
For there is one God.
There is also one mediator between God and the human race,
Christ Jesus, himself human,

    6: 
who gave himself as ransom for all.
This was the testimony at the proper time. 
    7: For this I was appointed preacher and apostle (I am speaking the truth, I am not lying), teacher of the Gentiles in faith and truth.

    8: It is my wish, then, that in every place the men should pray, lifting up holy hands, without anger or argument. 
    9: imilarly,  women should adorn themselves with proper conduct, with modesty and self-control, not with braided hairstyles and gold ornaments, or pearls, or expensive clothes, 
    10: but rather, as befits women who profess reverence for God, with good deeds. 
    11: A woman must receive instruction silently and under complete control. 
    12: I do not permit a woman to teach or to have authority over a man. She must be quiet. 
    13: For Adam was formed first, then Eve. 
    14: Further, Adam was not deceived, but the woman was deceived and transgressed. 
    15: But she will be saved through motherhood, provided women persevere in faith and love and holiness, with self-control.


  Chapter 3.

    1: This saying is trustworthy:[b] whoever aspires to the office of bishop desires a noble task. 
    2: 
    3: Qualifications of Various Ministers. 1 This saying is trustworthy:[b] whoever aspires to the office of bishop desires a noble task. 2 Therefore, a bishop must be irreproachable, married only once, temperate, self-controlled, decent, hospitable, able to teach, 3 not a drunkard, not aggressive, but gentle, not contentious, not a lover of money. 
    4: He must manage his own household well, keeping his children under control with perfect dignity; 
    5: for if a man does not know how to manage his own household, how can he take care of the church of God? 
    6: He should not be a recent convert, so that he may not become conceited and thus incur the devil’s punishment. 
    7: He must also have a good reputation among outsiders, so that he may not fall into disgrace, the devil’s trap.

    8: Similarly, deacons must be dignified, not deceitful, not addicted to drink, not greedy for sordid gain, 
    9: olding fast to the mystery of the faith with a clear conscience. 
    10: Moreover, they should be tested first; then, if there is nothing against them, let them serve as deacons. 
    11: Women, similarly, should be dignified, not slanderers, but temperate and faithful in everything. 
    12: Deacons may be married only once and must manage their children and their households well. 
    13: Thus those who serve well as deacons gain good standing and much confidence in their faith in Christ Jesus.
The Mystery of Our Religion. 
    14: I am writing you about these matters, although I hope to visit you soon. 
    15: But if I should be delayed, you should know how to behave in the household of God, which is the church of the living God, the pillar and foundation of truth. 
    16: Undeniably great is the mystery of devotion,
Who was manifested in the flesh,
vindicated in the spirit,
seen by angels,
proclaimed to the Gentiles,
believed in throughout the world,
taken up in glory.


  Chapter 4.

    1: Now the Spirit explicitly says that in the last times some will turn away from the faith by paying attention to deceitful spirits and demonic instructions 
    2: through the hypocrisy of liars with branded consciences. 
    3: 
    4: False Asceticism. 1 Now the Spirit explicitly says that in the last times some will turn away from the faith by paying attention to deceitful spirits and demonic instructions 2 through the hypocrisy of liars with branded consciences. 3 They forbid marriage and require abstinence from foods that God created to be received with thanksgiving by those who believe and know the truth. 4 For everything created by God is good, and nothing is to be rejected when received with thanksgiving, 
    5: for it is made holy by the invocation of God in prayer.
Counsel to Timothy. 
    6: If you will give these instructions to the brothers, you will be a good minister of Christ Jesus, nourished on the words of the faith and of the sound teaching you have followed. 
    7: Avoid profane and silly myths. Train yourself for devotion, 
    8: for, while physical training is of limited value, devotion is valuable in every respect, since it holds a promise of life both for the present and for the future. 
    9: his saying is trustworthy and deserves full acceptance. 
    10: For this we toil and struggle, because we have set our hope on the living God, who is the savior of all, especially of those who believe.

    11: Command and teach these things. 
    12: Let no one have contempt for your youth, but set an example for those who believe, in speech, conduct, love, faith, and purity. 
    13: Until I arrive, attend to the reading, exhortation, and teaching. 
    14: Do not neglect the gift you have, which was conferred on you through the prophetic word with the imposition of hands of the presbyterate. 
    15: Be diligent in these matters, be absorbed in them, so that your progress may be evident to everyone. 
    16: Attend to yourself and to your teaching; persevere in both tasks, for by doing so you will save both yourself and those who listen to you.


End of day 334.