Day 254:

Reading Ezekiel, chapters ['33', '34', '35', '36']:

  Chapter 33.

    1: The word of the Lord came to me: 
    2: 
    3: 
The Prophet as Sentinel. 1 The word of the Lord came to me: 2 Son of man, speak to your people and tell them: When I bring the sword against a land, if the people of that land select one of their number as a sentinel for them, 3 and the sentinel sees the sword coming against the land, he should blow the trumpet to warn the people. 
    4: If they hear the trumpet but do not take the warning and a sword attacks and kills them, their blood will be on their own heads. 
    5: They heard the trumpet blast but ignored the warning; their blood is on them. If they had heeded the warning, they could have escaped with their lives. 
    6: If, however, the sentinel sees the sword coming and does not blow the trumpet, so that the sword attacks and takes someone’s life, his life will be taken for his own sin, but I will hold the sentinel responsible for his blood.

    7: You, son of man—I have appointed you as a sentinel for the house of Israel; when you hear a word from my mouth, you must warn them for me. 
    8: When I say to the wicked, “You wicked, you must die,” and you do not speak up to warn the wicked about their ways, they shall die in their sins, but I will hold you responsible for their blood. 
    9: f, however, you warn the wicked to turn from their ways, but they do not, then they shall die in their sins, but you shall save your life.
Individual Retribution. 
    10: As for you, son of man, speak to the house of Israel: You people say, “Our crimes and our sins weigh us down; we are rotting away because of them. How can we survive?” 
    11: Answer them: As I live—oracle of the Lord God—I swear I take no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but rather that they turn from their ways and live. Turn, turn from your evil ways! Why should you die, house of Israel?

    12: As for you, son of man, say to your people: The justice of the just will not save them on the day they sin; the wickedness of the wicked will not bring about their downfall on the day they turn from their wickedness. No, the just cannot save their lives on the day they sin. 
    13: Even though I say to the just that they shall surely live, if they, relying on their justice, do wrong, none of their just deeds shall be remembered; because of the wrong they have done, they shall die. 
    14: And though I say to the wicked that they shall die, if they turn away from sin and do what is just and right— 
    15: returning pledges, restoring stolen goods, walking by statutes that bring life, doing nothing wrong—they shall surely live; they shall not die. 
    16: None of the sins they committed shall be remembered against them. If they do what is right and just, they shall surely live.

    17: Your people say, “The way of the Lord is not fair!” But it is their way that is not fair. 
    18: When the just turn away from justice and do wrong, they shall die for it. 
    19: When the wicked turn away from wickedness and do what is right and just, because of this they shall live. 
    20: But still you say, “The way of the Lord is not fair!” I will judge each of you according to your ways, house of Israel.
The Survivor from Jerusalem. 
    21: On the fifth day of the tenth month, in the twelfth year of our exile, the survivor came to me from Jerusalem and said, “The city is taken!” 
    22: The hand of the Lord had come upon me the evening before the survivor arrived and opened my mouth when he reached me in the morning. My mouth was opened, and I was mute no longer.
Those Left in Judah. 
    23: The word of the Lord came to me: 
    24: Son of man, these who live among the ruins in the land of Israel are saying: “Abraham was only one person, yet he was given possession of the land. Since we are many, the land must be given to us as our possession.” 
    25: Therefore say to them: Thus says the Lord God: You eat on the mountains, you raise your eyes to your idols, you shed blood—yet you would keep possession of the land? 
    26: You rely on your swords, you commit abominations, each defiles his neighbor’s wife—yet you would keep possession of the land? 
    27: Say this to them: Thus says the Lord God: As I live, those among the ruins shall fall by the sword; those in the open field I have made food for the wild beasts; and those in rocky hideouts and caves shall die by the plague. 
    28: I will make the land a desolate waste, so that its proud strength will come to an end, and the mountains of Israel shall be so desolate that no one will cross them. 
    29: Thus they shall know that I am the Lord, when I make the land a desolate waste because of all the abominations they committed.
Popular Misunderstanding. 
    30: As for you, son of man, your people are talking about you beside the walls and in the doorways of houses. They say to one another, “Let’s go hear the latest word that comes from the Lord.” 
    31: My people come to you, gathering as a crowd and sitting in front of you to hear your words, but they will not act on them. Love songs are on their lips, but in their hearts they pursue dishonest gain. 
    32: 
    33: The Prophet as Sentinel. 1 The word of the Lord came to me: 2 Son of man, speak to your people and tell them: When I bring the sword against a land, if the people of that land select one of their number as a sentinel for them, 3 and the sentinel sees the sword coming against the land, he should blow the trumpet to warn the people. 4 If they hear the trumpet but do not take the warning and a sword attacks and kills them, their blood will be on their own heads. 5 They heard the trumpet blast but ignored the warning; their blood is on them. If they had heeded the warning, they could have escaped with their lives. 6 If, however, the sentinel sees the sword coming and does not blow the trumpet, so that the sword attacks and takes someone’s life, his life will be taken for his own sin, but I will hold the sentinel responsible for his blood.
7 You, son of man—I have appointed you as a sentinel for the house of Israel; when you hear a word from my mouth, you must warn them for me. 8 When I say to the wicked, “You wicked, you must die,” and you do not speak up to warn the wicked about their ways, they shall die in their sins, but I will hold you responsible for their blood. 9 If, however, you warn the wicked to turn from their ways, but they do not, then they shall die in their sins, but you shall save your life.
Individual Retribution. 10 As for you, son of man, speak to the house of Israel: You people say, “Our crimes and our sins weigh us down; we are rotting away because of them. How can we survive?” 11 Answer them: As I live—oracle of the Lord God—I swear I take no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but rather that they turn from their ways and live. Turn, turn from your evil ways! Why should you die, house of Israel?
12 As for you, son of man, say to your people: The justice of the just will not save them on the day they sin; the wickedness of the wicked will not bring about their downfall on the day they turn from their wickedness. No, the just cannot save their lives on the day they sin. 13 Even though I say to the just that they shall surely live, if they, relying on their justice, do wrong, none of their just deeds shall be remembered; because of the wrong they have done, they shall die. 14 And though I say to the wicked that they shall die, if they turn away from sin and do what is just and right— 15 returning pledges, restoring stolen goods, walking by statutes that bring life, doing nothing wrong—they shall surely live; they shall not die. 16 None of the sins they committed shall be remembered against them. If they do what is right and just, they shall surely live.
17 Your people say, “The way of the Lord is not fair!” But it is their way that is not fair. 18 When the just turn away from justice and do wrong, they shall die for it. 19 When the wicked turn away from wickedness and do what is right and just, because of this they shall live. 20 But still you say, “The way of the Lord is not fair!” I will judge each of you according to your ways, house of Israel.
The Survivor from Jerusalem. 21 On the fifth day of the tenth month,[b] in the twelfth year of our exile, the survivor came to me from Jerusalem and said, “The city is taken!” 22 The hand of the Lord had come upon me the evening before the survivor arrived and opened my mouth when he reached me in the morning. My mouth was opened, and I was mute no longer.
Those Left in Judah.[c] 23 The word of the Lord came to me: 24 Son of man, these who live among the ruins in the land of Israel are saying: “Abraham was only one person, yet he was given possession of the land. Since we are many, the land must be given to us as our possession.” 25 Therefore say to them: Thus says the Lord God: You eat on the mountains, you raise your eyes to your idols, you shed blood—yet you would keep possession of the land? 26 You rely on your swords, you commit abominations, each defiles his neighbor’s wife—yet you would keep possession of the land? 27 Say this to them: Thus says the Lord God: As I live, those among the ruins shall fall by the sword; those in the open field I have made food for the wild beasts; and those in rocky hideouts and caves shall die by the plague. 28 I will make the land a desolate waste, so that its proud strength will come to an end, and the mountains of Israel shall be so desolate that no one will cross them. 29 Thus they shall know that I am the Lord, when I make the land a desolate waste because of all the abominations they committed.
Popular Misunderstanding. 30 As for you, son of man, your people are talking about you beside the walls and in the doorways of houses. They say to one another, “Let’s go hear the latest word that comes from the Lord.” 31 My people come to you, gathering as a crowd and sitting in front of you to hear your words, but they will not act on them. Love songs are on their lips, but in their hearts they pursue dishonest gain. 32 For them you are only a singer[d] of love songs, with a pleasant voice and a clever touch. They listen to your words, but they do not obey them. 33 But when it comes—and it is surely coming!—they shall know that there was a prophet among them.


  Chapter 34.

    1: The word of the Lord came to me: 
    2: 
    3: 
    4: Parable of the Shepherds. 1 The word of the Lord came to me: 2 Son of man, prophesy against the shepherds of Israel. Prophesy and say to them: To the shepherds, thus says the Lord God: Woe to the shepherds of Israel who have been pasturing themselves! Should not shepherds pasture the flock? 3 You consumed milk, wore wool, and slaughtered fatlings, but the flock you did not pasture. 4 You did not strengthen the weak nor heal the sick nor bind up the injured. You did not bring back the stray or seek the lost but ruled them harshly and brutally. 
    5: So they were scattered for lack of a shepherd, and became food for all the wild beasts. They were scattered 
    6: and wandered over all the mountains and high hills; over the entire surface of the earth my sheep were scattered. No one looked after them or searched for them.

    7: Therefore, shepherds, hear the word of the Lord: 
    8: As I live—oracle of the Lord God—because my sheep became plunder, because my sheep became food for wild beasts, for lack of a shepherd, because my shepherds did not look after my sheep, but pastured themselves and did not pasture my sheep, 
    9: herefore, shepherds, hear the word of the Lord: 
    10: Thus says the Lord God: Look! I am coming against these shepherds. I will take my sheep out of their hand and put a stop to their shepherding my flock, so that these shepherds will no longer pasture them. I will deliver my flock from their mouths so it will not become their food.

    11: For thus says the Lord God: Look! I myself will search for my sheep and examine them. 
    12: As a shepherd examines his flock while he himself is among his scattered sheep, so will I examine my sheep. I will deliver them from every place where they were scattered on the day of dark clouds. 
    13: I will lead them out from among the peoples and gather them from the lands; I will bring them back to their own country and pasture them upon the mountains of Israel, in the ravines and every inhabited place in the land. 
    14: In good pastures I will pasture them; on the mountain heights of Israel will be their grazing land. There they will lie down on good grazing ground; in rich pastures they will be pastured on the mountains of Israel. 
    15: I myself will pasture my sheep; I myself will give them rest—oracle of the Lord God. 
    16: The lost I will search out, the strays I will bring back, the injured I will bind up, and the sick I will heal; but the sleek and the strong I will destroy. I will shepherd them in judgment.
Separation of the Sheep. 
    17: As for you, my flock, thus says the Lord God: I will judge between one sheep and another, between rams and goats. 
    18: Was it not enough for you to graze on the best pasture, that you had to trample the rest of your pastures with your hooves? Or to drink the clearest water, that you had to pollute the rest with your hooves? 
    19: Thus my flock had to graze on what your hooves had trampled and drink what your hooves had polluted. 
    20: Therefore thus says the Lord God: Now I will judge between the fat and the lean. 
    21: Because you push with flank and shoulder, and butt all the weak sheep with your horns until you drive them off, 
    22: I will save my flock so they can no longer be plundered; I will judge between one sheep and another. 
    23: I will appoint one shepherd over them to pasture them, my servant David; he shall pasture them and be their shepherd. 
    24: I, the Lord, will be their God, and my servant David will be prince in their midst. I, the Lord, have spoken.

    25: I will make a covenant of peace with them and rid the country of wild beasts so they will dwell securely in the wilderness and sleep in the forests. 
    26: I will settle them around my hill and send rain in its season, the blessing of abundant rain. 
    27: The trees of the field shall bear their fruits, and the land its crops, and they shall dwell securely on their own soil. They shall know that I am the Lord when I break the bars of their yoke and deliver them from the power of those who enslaved them. 
    28: They shall no longer be plundered by the nations nor will wild beasts devour them, but they shall dwell securely, with no one to frighten them. 
    29: I will prepare for them peaceful fields for planting so they are never again swept away by famine in the land or bear taunts from the nations. 
    30: Thus they shall know that I, the Lord, their God, am with them, and that they are my people, the house of Israel—oracle of the Lord God. 
    31: Yes, you are my flock: you people are the flock of my pasture, and I am your God—oracle of the Lord God.


  Chapter 35.

    1: The word of the Lord came to me: 
    2: 
    3: 
Against Edom. 1 The word of the Lord came to me: 2 Son of man, set your face against Mount Seir and prophesy against it. 3 Say to it: Thus says the Lord God: Watch out! I am against you, Mount Seir. I will stretch out my hand against you and turn you into a desolate waste. 
    4: 
    5: Against Edom. 1 The word of the Lord came to me: 2 Son of man, set your face against Mount Seir and prophesy against it. 3 Say to it: Thus says the Lord God: Watch out! I am against you, Mount Seir. I will stretch out my hand against you and turn you into a desolate waste. 4 Your cities I will turn into ruins, and you shall be a desolation; then you shall know that I am the Lord.
5 Because you nursed a long-standing hatred and handed the Israelites over to the sword at the time of their collapse, at the time of their final punishment,[b] 
    6: therefore, as I live—oracle of the Lord God—you are guilty of blood, and blood, I swear, shall pursue you. 
    7: I will make Mount Seir a desolate waste and cut off from it anyone who travels across it and back. 
    8: I will fill its mountains with the slain; those slain by the sword shall fall on your hills, into your valleys and all your ravines.

    9: I will make you a desolation forever,
    your cities will not be inhabited,
    and you shall know that I am the Lord.

    10: Because you said: The two nations and the two lands belong to me; let us take possession of them—although the Lord was there— 
    11: therefore, as I live—oracle of the Lord God—I will deal with you according to the anger and envy you dealt out to them in your hatred, and I will make myself known to them when I execute judgment on you, 
    12: then you shall know that I am the Lord.
I have heard all the insults you spoke against the mountains of Israel, saying: They are desolate; they have been given to us to devour. 
    13: You boasted against me with your mouths and used insolent words against me. I heard everything! 
    14: Thus says the Lord God: Because you rejoiced that the whole land was desolate, so I will do to you. 
    15: As you rejoiced over the devastation of the heritage of the house of Israel, the same I will do to you: you will become a ruin, Mount Seir, and the whole of Edom, all of it! Then they shall know that I am the Lord.


  Chapter 36.

    1: As for you, son of man, prophesy to the mountains of Israel and say: Mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord! 
    2: 
    3: 
Regeneration of the Land. 1 As for you, son of man, prophesy to the mountains of Israel and say: Mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord! 2 Thus says the Lord God: Because the enemy said about you, “Ha! the ancient heights have become our possession,” 3 therefore prophesy and say: Thus says the Lord God: because you have been ridiculed and hounded on all sides for becoming a possession for the remaining nations and have become a byword and a popular jeer, 
    4: therefore, mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord God: Thus says the Lord God to the mountains and hills, to the ravines and valleys, to the desolate ruins and abandoned cities, plundered and mocked by the nations remaining around you: 
    5: 
    6: Regeneration of the Land. 1 As for you, son of man, prophesy to the mountains of Israel and say: Mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord! 2 Thus says the Lord God: Because the enemy said about you, “Ha! the ancient heights have become our possession,” 3 therefore prophesy and say: Thus says the Lord God: because you have been ridiculed and hounded on all sides for becoming a possession for the remaining nations and have become a byword and a popular jeer, 4 therefore, mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord God: Thus says the Lord God to the mountains and hills, to the ravines and valleys, to the desolate ruins and abandoned cities, plundered and mocked by the nations remaining around you: 5 therefore thus says the Lord God: Truly, with burning jealousy I speak against the remaining nations and against Edom; they all took possession of my land for plunder with wholehearted joy and utter contempt. 6 Therefore, prophesy concerning the land of Israel and say to the mountains and hills, to the ravines and valleys: Thus says the Lord God: See! in my jealous fury I speak, because you endured the reproach of the nations. 
    7: Therefore, thus says the Lord God: I raise my hand and swear: the nations around you shall bear their own reproach.

    8: But you, mountains of Israel, you will sprout branches and bear fruit for my people Israel, for they are coming soon. 
    9: ook! I am for you! I will turn my face toward you; you will be plowed and planted. 
    10: Upon you I will multiply the whole house of Israel; cities shall be resettled and ruins rebuilt. 
    11: Upon you I will multiply people and animals so they can multiply and be fruitful. I will resettle you as in the past, and make you more prosperous than at your beginning; then you shall know that I am the Lord.

    12: Upon you I will have them walk, my people Israel. They shall possess you, and you shall be their heritage. Never again shall you rob them of their children.

    13: Thus says the Lord God: Because they say of you, “You devour your own people, you rob your nation of its children,” 
    14: therefore, you shall never again devour your people or rob your nation of its children—oracle of the Lord God. 
    15: I will no longer make you listen to the reproach of nations. You will never again endure insults from the peoples. Never again shall you rob your nation of its children—oracle of the Lord God.
Regeneration of the People. 
    16: The word of the Lord came to me: 
    17: Son of man, when the house of Israel lived in its land, they defiled it with their behavior and their deeds. In my sight their behavior was like the impurity of a woman in menstruation. 
    18: So I poured out my fury upon them for the blood they poured out on the ground and for the idols with which they defiled it. 
    19: I scattered them among the nations, and they were dispersed through other lands; according to their behavior and their deeds I carried out judgment against them. 
    20: But when they came to the nations, where they went, they desecrated my holy name, for people said of them: “These are the people of the Lord, yet they had to leave their land.” 
    21: So I relented because of my holy name which the house of Israel desecrated among the nations to which they came. 
    22: Therefore say to the house of Israel: Thus says the Lord God: Not for your sake do I act, house of Israel, but for the sake of my holy name, which you desecrated among the nations to which you came. 
    23: But I will show the holiness of my great name, desecrated among the nations, in whose midst you desecrated it. Then the nations shall know that I am the Lord—oracle of the Lord God—when through you I show my holiness before their very eyes. 
    24: I will take you away from among the nations, gather you from all the lands, and bring you back to your own soil. 
    25: I will sprinkle clean water over you to make you clean; from all your impurities and from all your idols I will cleanse you. 
    26: I will give you a new heart, and a new spirit I will put within you. I will remove the heart of stone from your flesh and give you a heart of flesh. 
    27: I will put my spirit within you so that you walk in my statutes, observe my ordinances, and keep them. 
    28: You will live in the land I gave to your ancestors; you will be my people, and I will be your God. 
    29: I will deliver you from all your impurities. I will summon the grain and make it plentiful; I will not send famine against you. 
    30: I will increase the fruit on your trees and the crops in your fields so that you no longer endure reproach from the nations because of famine. 
    31: Then you will remember your evil behavior and your deeds that were not good; you will loathe yourselves for your sins and your abominations. 
    32: Not for your sake do I act—oracle of the Lord God. Let this be known to you! Be ashamed and humbled because of your behavior, house of Israel.

    33: Thus says the Lord God: When I cleanse you of all your guilt, I will resettle the cities and the ruins will be rebuilt. 
    34: The desolate land will be tilled—once a wasteland in the eyes of every passerby. 
    35: 
    36: Regeneration of the Land. 1 As for you, son of man, prophesy to the mountains of Israel and say: Mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord! 2 Thus says the Lord God: Because the enemy said about you, “Ha! the ancient heights have become our possession,” 3 therefore prophesy and say: Thus says the Lord God: because you have been ridiculed and hounded on all sides for becoming a possession for the remaining nations and have become a byword and a popular jeer, 4 therefore, mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord God: Thus says the Lord God to the mountains and hills, to the ravines and valleys, to the desolate ruins and abandoned cities, plundered and mocked by the nations remaining around you: 5 therefore thus says the Lord God: Truly, with burning jealousy I speak against the remaining nations and against Edom; they all took possession of my land for plunder with wholehearted joy and utter contempt. 6 Therefore, prophesy concerning the land of Israel and say to the mountains and hills, to the ravines and valleys: Thus says the Lord God: See! in my jealous fury I speak, because you endured the reproach of the nations. 7 Therefore, thus says the Lord God: I raise my hand and swear: the nations around you shall bear their own reproach.
8 But you, mountains of Israel, you will sprout branches and bear fruit for my people Israel, for they are coming soon. 9 Look! I am for you! I will turn my face toward you; you will be plowed and planted. 10 Upon you I will multiply the whole house of Israel; cities shall be resettled and ruins rebuilt. 11 Upon you I will multiply people and animals so they can multiply and be fruitful. I will resettle you as in the past, and make you more prosperous than at your beginning; then you shall know that I am the Lord.
12 Upon you I will have them walk, my people Israel. They shall possess you, and you shall be their heritage. Never again shall you rob them of their children.
13 Thus says the Lord God: Because they say of you, “You devour your own people, you rob your nation of its children,” 14 therefore, you shall never again devour your people or rob your nation of its children—oracle of the Lord God. 15 I will no longer make you listen to the reproach of nations. You will never again endure insults from the peoples. Never again shall you rob your nation of its children—oracle of the Lord God.
Regeneration of the People. 16 The word of the Lord came to me: 17 Son of man, when the house of Israel lived in its land, they defiled it with their behavior and their deeds. In my sight their behavior was like the impurity of a woman in menstruation. 18 So I poured out my fury upon them for the blood they poured out on the ground and for the idols with which they defiled it. 19 I scattered them among the nations, and they were dispersed through other lands; according to their behavior and their deeds I carried out judgment against them. 20 [b]But when they came to the nations, where they went, they desecrated my holy name, for people said of them: “These are the people of the Lord, yet they had to leave their land.” 21 So I relented because of my holy name which the house of Israel desecrated among the nations to which they came. 22 Therefore say to the house of Israel: Thus says the Lord God: Not for your sake do I act, house of Israel, but for the sake of my holy name, which you desecrated among the nations to which you came. 23 But I will show the holiness of my great name, desecrated among the nations, in whose midst you desecrated it. Then the nations shall know that I am the Lord—oracle of the Lord God—when through you I show my holiness before their very eyes. 24 I will take you away from among the nations, gather you from all the lands, and bring you back to your own soil. 25 [c]I will sprinkle clean water over you to make you clean; from all your impurities and from all your idols I will cleanse you. 26 I will give you a new heart, and a new spirit I will put within you. I will remove the heart of stone from your flesh and give you a heart of flesh. 27 I will put my spirit within you so that you walk in my statutes, observe my ordinances, and keep them. 28 You will live in the land I gave to your ancestors; you will be my people, and I will be your God. 29 I will deliver you from all your impurities. I will summon the grain and make it plentiful; I will not send famine against you. 30 I will increase the fruit on your trees and the crops in your fields so that you no longer endure reproach from the nations because of famine. 31 Then you will remember your evil behavior and your deeds that were not good; you will loathe yourselves for your sins and your abominations. 32 Not for your sake do I act—oracle of the Lord God. Let this be known to you! Be ashamed and humbled because of your behavior, house of Israel.
33 Thus says the Lord God: When I cleanse you of all your guilt, I will resettle the cities and the ruins will be rebuilt. 34 The desolate land will be tilled—once a wasteland in the eyes of every passerby. 35 They will say, “This once-desolate land has become like the garden of Eden. The cities once ruined, laid waste and destroyed, are now resettled and fortified.” 36 Then the surrounding nations that remain shall know that I, the Lord, have rebuilt what was destroyed and replanted what was desolate. I, the Lord, have spoken: I will do it. 
    37: Thus says the Lord God: This also I will be persuaded to do for the house of Israel: to multiply them like sheep. 
    38: Like sheep for sacrifice, like the sheep of Jerusalem on its feast days, the ruined cities shall be filled with flocks of people; then they shall know that I am the Lord.


End of day 254.