Day 302:

Reading John, chapters ['9', '10', '11', '12']:

  Chapter 9.

    1: As he passed by he saw a man blind from birth. 
    2: His disciples asked him, “Rabbi, who sinned, this man or his parents, that he was born blind?” 
    3: Jesus answered, “Neither he nor his parents sinned; it is so that the works of God might be made visible through him. 
    4: We have to do the works of the one who sent me while it is day. Night is coming when no one can work. 
    5: While I am in the world, I am the light of the world.” 
    6: When he had said this, he spat on the ground and made clay with the saliva, and smeared the clay on his eyes, 
    7: and said to him, “Go wash in the Pool of Siloam” (which means Sent). So he went and washed, and came back able to see.

    8: 
    9: he Man Born Blind. 1 As he passed by he saw a man blind from birth. 2 [b]His disciples asked him, “Rabbi, who sinned, this man or his parents, that he was born blind?” 3 Jesus answered, “Neither he nor his parents sinned; it is so that the works of God might be made visible through him. 4 We have to do the works of the one who sent me while it is day. Night is coming when no one can work. 5 While I am in the world, I am the light of the world.” 6 When he had said this, he spat on the ground and made clay with the saliva, and smeared the clay on his eyes, 7 and said to him, “Go wash[c] in the Pool of Siloam” (which means Sent). So he went and washed, and came back able to see.
8 His neighbors and those who had seen him earlier as a beggar said, “Isn’t this the one who used to sit and beg?” 9 Some said, “It is,” but others said, “No, he just looks like him.” He said, “I am.” 
    10: So they said to him, “ how were your eyes opened?” 
    11: He replied, “The man called Jesus made clay and anointed my eyes and told me, ‘Go to Siloam and wash.’ So I went there and washed and was able to see.” 
    12: And they said to him, “Where is he?” He said, “I don’t know.”

    13: They brought the one who was once blind to the Pharisees. 
    14: Now Jesus had made clay and opened his eyes on a sabbath. 
    15: So then the Pharisees also asked him how he was able to see. He said to them, “He put clay on my eyes, and I washed, and now I can see.” 
    16: So some of the Pharisees said, “This man is not from God, because he does not keep the sabbath.”  others said, “How can a sinful man do such signs?” And there was a division among them. 
    17: So they said to the blind man again, “What do you have to say about him, since he opened your eyes?” He said, “He is a prophet.”

    18: Now the Jews did not believe that he had been blind and gained his sight until they summoned the parents of the one who had gained his sight. 
    19: They asked them, “Is this your son, who you say was born blind? How does he now see?” 
    20: His parents answered and said, “We know that this is our son and that he was born blind. 
    21: We do not know how he sees now, nor do we know who opened his eyes. Ask him, he is of age; he can speak for himself.” 
    22: His parents said this because they were afraid of the Jews, for the Jews had already agreed that if anyone acknowledged him as the Messiah, he would be expelled from the synagogue. 
    23: For this reason his parents said, “He is of age; question him.”

    24: So a second time they called the man who had been blind and said to him, “Give God the praise! We know that this man is a sinner.” 
    25: He replied, “If he is a sinner, I do not know. One thing I do know is that I was blind and now I see.” 
    26: So they said to him, “What did he do to you? How did he open your eyes?” 
    27: He answered them, “I told you already and you did not listen. Why do you want to hear it again? Do you want to become his disciples, too?” 
    28: They ridiculed him and said, “You are that man’s disciple; we are disciples of Moses! 
    29: We know that God spoke to Moses, but we do not know where this one is from.” 
    30: The man answered and said to them, “This is what is so amazing, that you do not know where he is from, yet he opened my eyes. 
    31: We know that God does not listen to sinners, but if one is devout and does his will, he listens to him. 
    32: It is unheard of that anyone ever opened the eyes of a person born blind. 
    33: If this man were not from God, he would not be able to do anything.” 
    34: They answered and said to him, “You were born totally in sin, and are you trying to teach us?” Then they threw him out.

    35: When Jesus heard that they had thrown him out, he found him and said, “Do you believe in the Son of Man?” 
    36: He answered and said, “Who is he, sir, that I may believe in him?” 
    37: Jesus said to him, “You have seen him and the one speaking with you is he.” 
    38: He said, “I do believe, Lord,” and he worshiped him. 
    39: Then Jesus said, “I came into this world for judgment, so that those who do not see might see, and those who do see might become blind.”

    40: Some of the Pharisees who were with him heard this and said to him, “Surely we are not also blind, are we?” 
    41: Jesus said to them, “If you were blind, you would have no sin; but now you are saying, ‘We see,’ so your sin remains.


  Chapter 10.

    1: 
The Good Shepherd. 1 “Amen, amen, I say to you, whoever does not enter a sheepfold[b] through the gate but climbs over elsewhere is a thief and a robber. 
    2: But whoever enters through the gate is the shepherd of the sheep. 
    3: The gatekeeper opens it for him, and the sheep hear his voice, as he calls his own sheep by name and leads them out. 
    4: When he has driven out all his own, he walks ahead of them, and the sheep follow him, because they recognize his voice. 
    5: But they will not follow a stranger; they will run away from him, because they do not recognize the voice of strangers.” 
    6: Although Jesus used this figure of speech, they did not realize what he was trying to tell them.

    7: So Jesus said again, “Amen, amen, I say to you, I am the gate for the sheep. 
    8: All who came [before me] are thieves and robbers, but the sheep did not listen to them. 
    9: 
    10: The Good Shepherd. 1 “Amen, amen, I say to you, whoever does not enter a sheepfold[b] through the gate but climbs over elsewhere is a thief and a robber. 2 But whoever enters through the gate is the shepherd of the sheep. 3 The gatekeeper opens it for him, and the sheep hear his voice, as he calls his own sheep by name and leads them out. 4 [c]When he has driven out all his own, he walks ahead of them, and the sheep follow him, because they recognize his voice. 5 But they will not follow a stranger; they will run away from him, because they do not recognize the voice of strangers.” 6 Although Jesus used this figure of speech,[d] they did not realize what he was trying to tell them.
7 [e]So Jesus said again, “Amen, amen, I say to you, I am the gate for the sheep. 8 [f]All who came [before me] are thieves and robbers, but the sheep did not listen to them. 9 I am the gate. Whoever enters through me will be saved, and will come in and go out and find pasture. 10 A thief comes only to steal and slaughter and destroy; I came so that they might have life and have it more abundantly. 
    11: I am the good shepherd. A good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep. 
    12: A hired man, who is not a shepherd and whose sheep are not his own, sees a wolf coming and leaves the sheep and runs away, and the wolf catches and scatters them. 
    13: This is because he works for pay and has no concern for the sheep. 
    14: I am the good shepherd, and I know mine and mine know me, 
    15: just as the Father knows me and I know the Father; and I will lay down my life for the sheep. 
    16: I have other sheep that do not belong to this fold. These also I must lead, and they will hear my voice, and there will be one flock, one shepherd. 
    17: This is why the Father loves me, because I lay down my life in order to take it up again. 
    18: No one takes it from me, but I lay it down on my own. I have power to lay it down, and power to take it up again. This command I have received from my Father.”

    19: Again there was a division among the Jews because of these words. 
    20: Many of them said, “He is possessed and out of his mind; why listen to him?” 
    21: Others said, “These are not the words of one possessed; surely a demon cannot open the eyes of the blind, can he?”
Feast of the Dedication. 
    22: The feast of the Dedication was then taking place in Jerusalem. It was winter. 
    23: And Jesus walked about in the temple area on the Portico of Solomon. 
    24: So the Jews gathered around him and said to him, “How long are you going to keep us in suspense? If you are the Messiah, tell us plainly.” 
    25: Jesus answered them, “I told you and you do not believe. The works I do in my Father’s name testify to me. 
    26: But you do not believe, because you are not among my sheep. 
    27: My sheep hear my voice; I know them, and they follow me. 
    28: I give them eternal life, and they shall never perish. No one can take them out of my hand. 
    29: My Father, who has given them to me, is greater than all, and no one can take them out of the Father’s hand. 
    30: The Father and I are one.”

    31: The Jews again picked up rocks to stone him. 
    32: Jesus answered them, “I have shown you many good works from my Father. For which of these are you trying to stone me?” 
    33: The Jews answered him, “We are not stoning you for a good work but for blasphemy. You, a man, are making yourself God.” 
    34: Jesus answered them, “Is it not written in your law, ‘I said, “You are gods”’? 
    35: If it calls them gods to whom the word of God came, and scripture cannot be set aside, 
    36: can you say that the one whom the Father has consecrated and sent into the world blasphemes because I said, ‘I am the Son of God’? 
    37: If I do not perform my Father’s works, do not believe me; 
    38: but if I perform them, even if you do not believe me, believe the works, so that you may realize  that the Father is in me and I am in the Father.” 
    39:  they tried again to arrest him; but he escaped from their power.

    40: He went back across the Jordan to the place where John first baptized, and there he remained. 
    41: Many came to him and said, “John performed no sign, but everything John said about this man was true.” 
    42: And many there began to believe in him.


  Chapter 11.

    1: 
The Raising of Lazarus. 1 Now a man was ill, Lazarus from Bethany, the village of Mary and her sister Martha. 
    2: Mary was the one who had anointed the Lord with perfumed oil and dried his feet with her hair; it was her brother Lazarus who was ill. 
    3: So the sisters sent word to him, saying, “Master, the one you love is ill.” 
    4: When Jesus heard this he said, “This illness is not to end in death, but is for the glory of God, that the Son of God may be glorified through it.” 
    5: Now Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus. 
    6: So when he heard that he was ill, he remained for two days in the place where he was. 
    7: Then after this he said to his disciples, “Let us go back to Judea.” 
    8: The disciples said to him, “Rabbi, the Jews were just trying to stone you, and you want to go back there?” 
    9: esus answered, “Are there not twelve hours in a day? If one walks during the day, he does not stumble, because he sees the light of this world. 
    10: 
    11: The Raising of Lazarus. 1 Now a man was ill, Lazarus from Bethany, the village of Mary and her sister Martha. 2 Mary was the one who had anointed the Lord with perfumed oil and dried his feet with her hair; it was her brother Lazarus who was ill. 3 So the sisters sent word to him, saying, “Master, the one you love is ill.” 4 When Jesus heard this he said, “This illness is not to end in death,[b] but is for the glory of God, that the Son of God may be glorified through it.” 5 Now Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus. 6 So when he heard that he was ill, he remained for two days in the place where he was. 7 Then after this he said to his disciples, “Let us go back to Judea.” 8 The disciples said to him, “Rabbi, the Jews were just trying to stone you, and you want to go back there?” 9 Jesus answered, “Are there not twelve hours in a day? If one walks during the day, he does not stumble, because he sees the light of this world. 10 But if one walks at night, he stumbles, because the light is not in him.”[c] 11 He said this, and then told them, “Our friend Lazarus is asleep, but I am going to awaken him.” 
    12: So the disciples said to him, “Master, if he is asleep, he will be saved.” 
    13: But Jesus was talking about his death, while they thought that he meant ordinary sleep. 
    14: So then Jesus said to them clearly, “Lazarus has died. 
    15: And I am glad for you that I was not there, that you may believe. Let us go to him.” 
    16: So Thomas, called Didymus, said to his fellow disciples, “Let us also go to die with him.”

    17: When Jesus arrived, he found that Lazarus had already been in the tomb for four days. 
    18: Now Bethany was near Jerusalem, only about two miles away. 
    19: And many of the Jews had come to Martha and Mary to comfort them about their brother. 
    20: When Martha heard that Jesus was coming, she went to meet him; but Mary sat at home. 
    21: Martha said to Jesus, “Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died. 
    22:  even now I know that whatever you ask of God, God will give you.” 
    23: Jesus said to her, “Your brother will rise.” 
    24: Martha said to him, “I know he will rise, in the resurrection on the last day.” 
    25: Jesus told her, “I am the resurrection and the life; whoever believes in me, even if he dies, will live, 
    26: and everyone who lives and believes in me will never die. Do you believe this?” 
    27: She said to him, “Yes, Lord. I have come to believe that you are the Messiah, the Son of God, the one who is coming into the world.”

    28: When she had said this, she went and called her sister Mary secretly, saying, “The teacher is here and is asking for you.” 
    29: As soon as she heard this, she rose quickly and went to him. 
    30: For Jesus had not yet come into the village, but was still where Martha had met him. 
    31: So when the Jews who were with her in the house comforting her saw Mary get up quickly and go out, they followed her, presuming that she was going to the tomb to weep there. 
    32: When Mary came to where Jesus was and saw him, she fell at his feet and said to him, “Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died.” 
    33: When Jesus saw her weeping and the Jews who had come with her weeping, he became perturbed and deeply troubled, 
    34: and said, “Where have you laid him?” They said to him, “Sir, come and see.” 
    35: And Jesus wept. 
    36: So the Jews said, “See how he loved him.” 
    37: But some of them said, “Could not the one who opened the eyes of the blind man have done something so that this man would not have died?”

    38: So Jesus, perturbed again, came to the tomb. It was a cave, and a stone lay across it. 
    39: Jesus said, “Take away the stone.” Martha, the dead man’s sister, said to him, “Lord, by now there will be a stench; he has been dead for four days.” 
    40: Jesus said to her, “Did I not tell you that if you believe you will see the glory of God?” 
    41: So they took away the stone. And Jesus raised his eyes and said, “Father, I thank you for hearing me. 
    42: I know that you always hear me; but because of the crowd here I have said this, that they may believe that you sent me.” 
    43: And when he had said this, he cried out in a loud voice, “Lazarus, come out!” 
    44: The dead man came out, tied hand and foot with burial bands, and his face was wrapped in a cloth. So Jesus said to them, “Untie him and let him go.”
Session of the Sanhedrin. 
    45: Now many of the Jews who had come to Mary and seen what he had done began to believe in him. 
    46: But some of them went to the Pharisees and told them what Jesus had done. 
    47: So the chief priests and the Pharisees convened the Sanhedrin and said, “What are we going to do? This man is performing many signs. 
    48: If we leave him alone, all will believe in him, and the Romans will come and take away both our land and our nation.” 
    49: But one of them, Caiaphas, who was high priest that year, said to them, “You know nothing, 
    50: nor do you consider that it is better for you that one man should die instead of the people, so that the whole nation may not perish.” 
    51: He did not say this on his own, but since he was high priest for that year, he prophesied that Jesus was going to die for the nation, 
    52: and not only for the nation, but also to gather into one the dispersed children of God. 
    53: So from that day on they planned to kill him.

    54: So Jesus no longer walked about in public among the Jews, but he left for the region near the desert, to a town called Ephraim, and there he remained with his disciples.
The Last Passover. 
    55: Now the Passover of the Jews was near, and many went up from the country to Jerusalem before Passover to purify themselves. 
    56: They looked for Jesus and said to one another as they were in the temple area, “What do you think? That he will not come to the feast?” 
    57: For the chief priests and the Pharisees had given orders that if anyone knew where he was, he should inform them, so that they might arrest him.


  Chapter 12.

    1: 
    2: The Anointing at Bethany. 1 Six days before Passover Jesus came to Bethany, where Lazarus was, whom Jesus had raised from the dead. 2 They gave a dinner for him there, and Martha served, while Lazarus was one of those reclining at table with him. 
    3: Mary took a liter of costly perfumed oil made from genuine aromatic nard and anointed the feet of Jesus and dried them with her hair; the house was filled with the fragrance of the oil. 
    4: Then Judas the Iscariot, one  his disciples, and the one who would betray him, said, 
    5: “Why was this oil not sold for three hundred days’ wages and given to the poor?” 
    6: He said this not because he cared about the poor but because he was a thief and held the money bag and used to steal the contributions. 
    7: So Jesus said, “Leave her alone. Let her keep this for the day of my burial. 
    8: You always have the poor with you, but you do not always have me.”

    9: The] large crowd of the Jews found out that he was there and came, not only because of Jesus, but also to see Lazarus, whom he had raised from the dead. 
    10: And the chief priests plotted to kill Lazarus too, 
    11: 
    12: The Anointing at Bethany. 1 Six days before Passover Jesus came to Bethany, where Lazarus was, whom Jesus had raised from the dead. 2 They gave a dinner for him there, and Martha served, while Lazarus was one of those reclining at table with him. 3 Mary took a liter of costly perfumed oil made from genuine aromatic nard and anointed the feet of Jesus[b] and dried them with her hair; the house was filled with the fragrance of the oil. 4 Then Judas the Iscariot, one [of] his disciples, and the one who would betray him, said, 5 “Why was this oil not sold for three hundred days’ wages[c] and given to the poor?” 6 He said this not because he cared about the poor but because he was a thief and held the money bag and used to steal the contributions. 7 So Jesus said, “Leave her alone. Let her keep this for the day of my burial.[d] 8 You always have the poor with you, but you do not always have me.”
9 [The] large crowd of the Jews found out that he was there and came, not only because of Jesus, but also to see Lazarus, whom he had raised from the dead. 10 And the chief priests plotted to kill Lazarus too, 11 because many of the Jews were turning away and believing in Jesus because of him.
The Entry into Jerusalem.[e] 12 On the next day, when the great crowd that had come to the feast heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem, 
    13: they took palm branches and went out to meet him, and cried out:
“Hosanna!
Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord,
    [even] the king of Israel.”

    14: Jesus found an ass and sat upon it, as is written:

    15: 
“Fear no more, O daughter Zion;
    see, your king comes, seated upon an ass’s colt.”

    16: His disciples did not understand this at first, but when Jesus had been glorified they remembered that these things were written about him and that they had done this for him. 
    17: So the crowd that was with him when he called Lazarus from the tomb and raised him from death continued to testify. 
    18: This was  why the crowd went to meet him, because they heard that he had done this sign. 
    19: So the Pharisees said to one another, “You see that you are gaining nothing. Look, the whole world has gone after him.”
The Coming of Jesus’ Hour.[k] 
    20: Now there were some Greeks among those who had come up to worship at the feast. 
    21: They came to Philip, who was from Bethsaida in Galilee, and asked him, “Sir, we would like to see Jesus.” 
    22: Philip went and told Andrew; then Andrew and Philip went and told Jesus. 
    23: Jesus answered them, “The hour has come for the Son of Man to be glorified. 
    24: Amen, amen, I say to you, unless a grain of wheat falls to the ground and dies, it remains just a grain of wheat; but if it dies, it produces much fruit. 
    25: Whoever loves his life loses it, and whoever hates his life in this world will preserve it for eternal life. 
    26: Whoever serves me must follow me, and where I am, there also will my servant be. The Father will honor whoever serves me.

    27: “I am troubled now. Yet what should I say? ‘Father, save me from this hour’? But it was for this purpose that I came to this hour. 
    28: Father, glorify your name.” Then a voice came from heaven, “I have glorified it and will glorify it again.” 
    29: The crowd there heard it and said it was thunder; but others said, “An angel has spoken to him.” 
    30: Jesus answered and said, “This voice did not come for my sake but for yours. 
    31: Now is the time of judgment on this world; now the ruler of this world will be driven out. 
    32: And when I am lifted up from the earth, I will draw everyone to myself.” 
    33: He said this indicating the kind of death he would die. 
    34: So the crowd answered him, “We have heard from the law that the Messiah remains forever. Then how can you say that the Son of Man must be lifted up? Who is this Son of Man?” 
    35: Jesus said to them, “The light will be among you only a little while. Walk while you have the light, so that darkness may not overcome you. Whoever walks in the dark does not know where he is going. 
    36: While you have the light, believe in the light, so that you may become children of the light.”
Unbelief and Belief Among the Jews. After he had said this, Jesus left and hid from them. 
    37: Although he had performed so many signs in their presence they did not believe in him, 
    38: in order that the word which Isaiah the prophet spoke might be fulfilled:
“Lord, who has believed our preaching,
    to whom has the might of the Lord been revealed?”

    39: For this reason they could not believe, because again Isaiah said:

    40: 
“He blinded their eyes
    and hardened their heart,
so that they might not see with their eyes
    and understand with their heart and be converted,
and I would heal them.”

    41: Isaiah said this because he saw his glory and spoke about him. 
    42: Nevertheless, many, even among the authorities, believed in him, but because of the Pharisees they did not acknowledge it openly in order not to be expelled from the synagogue. 
    43: For they preferred human praise to the glory of God.
Recapitulation. 
    44: Jesus cried out and said, “Whoever believes in me believes not only in me but also in the one who sent me, 
    45: and whoever sees me sees the one who sent me. 
    46: I came into the world as light, so that everyone who believes in me might not remain in darkness. 
    47: And if anyone hears my words and does not observe them, I do not condemn him, for I did not come to condemn the world but to save the world. 
    48: Whoever rejects me and does not accept my words has something to judge him: the word that I spoke, it will condemn him on the last day, 
    49: because I did not speak on my own, but the Father who sent me commanded me what to say and speak. 
    50: And I know that his commandment is eternal life. So what I say, I say as the Father told me.”


End of day 302.