Day 73:

Reading 2-Samuel, chapters ['13', '14', '15', '16']:

  Chapter 13.

    1: 
Amnon’s Rape of Tamar. 1 After this, the following occurred. David’s son Absalom had a beautiful sister named Tamar, and David’s son Amnon loved her. 
    2: 
    3: Amnon’s Rape of Tamar. 1 After this, the following occurred. David’s son Absalom had a beautiful sister named Tamar, and David’s son Amnon loved her. 2 He was in such anguish over his sister Tamar that he became sick; she was a virgin, and Amnon thought it impossible to do anything to her. 3 Now Amnon had a friend named Jonadab, son of David’s brother Shimeah, who was very clever. 
    4: He asked him, “Prince, why are you so dejected morning after morning? Why not tell me?” So Amnon said to him, “I am in love with Tamar, my brother Absalom’s sister.” 
    5: Then Jonadab replied, “Lie down on your bed and pretend to be sick. When your father comes to visit you, say to him, ‘Please let my sister Tamar come and encourage me to take food. If she prepares something in my presence, for me to see, I will eat it from her hand.’” 
    6: So Amnon lay down and pretended to be sick. When the king came to visit him, Amnon said to the king, “Please let my sister Tamar come and prepare some fried cakes before my eyes, that I may take food from her hand.”

    7: David then sent home a message to Tamar, “Please go to the house of your brother Amnon and prepare some food for him.” 
    8: Tamar went to the house of her brother Amnon, who was in bed. Taking dough and kneading it, she twisted it into cakes before his eyes and fried the cakes. 
    9: hen she took the pan and set out the cakes before him. But Amnon would not eat; he said, “Have everyone leave me.” When they had all left him, 
    10: Amnon said to Tamar, “Bring the food into the bedroom, that I may have it from your hand.” So Tamar picked up the cakes she had prepared and brought them to her brother Amnon in the bedroom. 
    11: But when she brought them close to him so he could eat, he seized her and said to her, “Come! Lie with me, my sister!” 
    12: 
    13: Amnon’s Rape of Tamar. 1 After this, the following occurred. David’s son Absalom had a beautiful sister named Tamar, and David’s son Amnon loved her. 2 He was in such anguish over his sister Tamar that he became sick; she was a virgin, and Amnon thought it impossible to do anything to her. 3 Now Amnon had a friend named Jonadab, son of David’s brother Shimeah, who was very clever. 4 He asked him, “Prince, why are you so dejected morning after morning? Why not tell me?” So Amnon said to him, “I am in love with Tamar, my brother Absalom’s sister.” 5 Then Jonadab replied, “Lie down on your bed and pretend to be sick. When your father comes to visit you, say to him, ‘Please let my sister Tamar come and encourage me to take food. If she prepares something in my presence, for me to see, I will eat it from her hand.’” 6 So Amnon lay down and pretended to be sick. When the king came to visit him, Amnon said to the king, “Please let my sister Tamar come and prepare some fried cakes before my eyes, that I may take food from her hand.”
7 David then sent home a message to Tamar, “Please go to the house of your brother Amnon and prepare some food for him.” 8 Tamar went to the house of her brother Amnon, who was in bed. Taking dough and kneading it, she twisted it into cakes before his eyes and fried the cakes. 9 Then she took the pan and set out the cakes before him. But Amnon would not eat; he said, “Have everyone leave me.” When they had all left him, 10 Amnon said to Tamar, “Bring the food into the bedroom, that I may have it from your hand.” So Tamar picked up the cakes she had prepared and brought them to her brother Amnon in the bedroom. 11 But when she brought them close to him so he could eat, he seized her and said to her, “Come! Lie with me, my sister!” 12 But she answered him, “No, my brother! Do not force me! This is not done in Israel. Do not commit this terrible crime. 13 Where would I take my shame? And you would be labeled a fool in Israel.[b] So please, speak to the king; he will not keep me from you.” 
    14: But he would not listen to her; he was too strong for her: he forced her down and raped her. 
    15: Then Amnon felt intense hatred for her; the hatred he felt for her far surpassed the love he had had for her. Amnon said to her, “Get up, leave.” 
    16: She replied, “No, brother, because sending me away would be far worse than this evil thing you have done to me.” He would not listen to her, 
    17: but called the youth who was his attendant and said, “Send this girl outside, away from me, and bar the door after her.” 
    18: Now she had on a long tunic, for that is how virgin princesses dressed in olden days. When his attendant put her out and barred the door after her, 
    19: Tamar put ashes on her head and tore the long tunic in which she was clothed. Then, putting her hands to her head, she went away crying loudly. 
    20: Her brother Absalom said to her: “Has your brother Amnon been with you? Keep still now, my sister; he is your brother. Do not take this so to heart.” So Tamar remained, devastated, in the house of her brother Absalom. 
    21: King David, when he heard of the whole affair, became very angry. He would not, however, antagonize Amnon, his high-spirited son; he loved him, because he was his firstborn. 
    22: And Absalom said nothing, good or bad, to Amnon; but Absalom hated Amnon for having humiliated his sister Tamar.
Absalom’s Plot. 
    23: Two years went by. It was sheep-shearing time for Absalom in Baal-hazor near Ephraim, and Absalom invited all the king’s sons. 
    24: Absalom went to the king and said: “Your servant has hired the shearers. Please, may the king come with all his servants to your servant.” 
    25: But the king said to Absalom, “No, my son, all of us should not go lest we be a burden to you.” And though Absalom urged him, he would not go but began to bid him good-bye. 
    26: Absalom then said, “If not you, then please let my brother Amnon come with us.” The king asked him, “Why should he go with you?” 
    27: But at Absalom’s urging, the king sent Amnon and with him all his other sons. Absalom prepared a banquet fit for a king. 
    28: But Absalom had instructed his attendants: “Now watch! When Amnon is merry with wine and I say to you, ‘Kill Amnon,’ put him to death. Do not be afraid, for it is I who order you to do it. Be strong and act like warriors.”
Death of Amnon. 
    29: When the attendants did to Amnon as Absalom had commanded, all the king’s other sons rose up, mounted their mules, and fled. 
    30: While they were still on the road, a report reached David: “Absalom has killed all the king’s sons and not one of them is left.” 
    31: The king stood up, tore his garments, and lay on the ground. All his servants standing by him also tore their garments. 
    32: But Jonadab, son of David’s brother Shimeah, spoke up: “Let not my lord think that all the young men, the king’s sons, have been killed! Amnon alone is dead, for Absalom was set on this ever since Amnon humiliated his sister Tamar. 
    33: Now let my lord the king not take so to heart that report, ‘All the king’s sons are dead.’ Amnon alone is dead.” 
    34: Meanwhile, Absalom had taken flight. Then the servant on watch looked out and saw a large group coming down the slope from the direction of Bahurim. He came in and reported this to the king: “I saw some men coming down the mountainside from the direction of Bahurim.” 
    35: So Jonadab said to the king: “There! The king’s sons have come. It is as your servant said.” 
    36: No sooner had he finished speaking than the king’s sons came in, weeping aloud. The king, too, and all his servants wept very bitterly. 
    37: But Absalom, who had taken flight, went to Talmai, son of Ammihud, king of Geshur, 
    38: and stayed in Geshur for three years. 
    39: All that time the king continued to mourn his son; but his intention of going out against Absalom abated as he was consoled over the death of Amnon.


  Chapter 14.

    1: 
The Wise Woman of Tekoa. 1 Now Joab, son of Zeruiah, knew how the king felt toward Absalom. 
    2: Joab sent to Tekoa and brought from there a wise woman, to whom he said: “Pretend to be in mourning. Put on mourning apparel and do not anoint yourself with oil, that you may appear to be a woman who has long been mourning someone dead. 
    3: 
    4: The Wise Woman of Tekoa. 1 Now Joab, son of Zeruiah, knew how the king felt toward Absalom. 2 Joab sent to Tekoa and brought from there a wise woman, to whom he said: “Pretend to be in mourning. Put on mourning apparel and do not anoint yourself with oil, that you may appear to be a woman who has long been mourning someone dead. 3 Then go to the king and speak to him in this manner.” And Joab told her what to say.
4 So the woman of Tekoa went to the king and fell to the ground in homage, saying, “Help, O king!” 
    5: The king said to her, “What do you want?” She replied: “Alas, I am a widow; my husband is dead. 
    6: Your servant had two sons, who quarreled in the field, with no one to part them, and one of them struck his brother and killed him. 
    7: Then the whole clan confronted your servant and demanded: ‘Give up the one who struck down his brother. We must put him to death for the life of his brother whom he has killed; we must do away with the heir also.’ Thus they will quench my remaining hope and leave my husband neither name nor posterity upon the earth.” 
    8: The king then said to the woman: “Go home. I will issue a command on your behalf.” 
    9: he woman of Tekoa answered him, “Upon me and my family be the blame, my lord king; the king and his throne are innocent.” 
    10: Then the king said, “If anyone says a word to you, have him brought to me, and he shall not touch you again.” 
    11: But she said, “Please, let the king remember the Lord your God, that the avenger of blood may not go too far in destruction and that my son may not be done away with.” He replied, “As the Lord lives, not a hair of your son shall fall to the ground.”

    12: But the woman continued, “Please let your servant say still another word to my lord the king.” He replied, “Speak.” 
    13: 
    14: The Wise Woman of Tekoa. 1 Now Joab, son of Zeruiah, knew how the king felt toward Absalom. 2 Joab sent to Tekoa and brought from there a wise woman, to whom he said: “Pretend to be in mourning. Put on mourning apparel and do not anoint yourself with oil, that you may appear to be a woman who has long been mourning someone dead. 3 Then go to the king and speak to him in this manner.” And Joab told her what to say.
4 So the woman of Tekoa went to the king and fell to the ground in homage, saying, “Help, O king!” 5 The king said to her, “What do you want?” She replied: “Alas, I am a widow; my husband is dead. 6 Your servant had two sons, who quarreled in the field, with no one to part them, and one of them struck his brother and killed him. 7 Then the whole clan confronted your servant and demanded: ‘Give up the one who struck down his brother. We must put him to death for the life of his brother whom he has killed; we must do away with the heir also.’ Thus they will quench my remaining hope and leave my husband neither name nor posterity upon the earth.” 8 The king then said to the woman: “Go home. I will issue a command on your behalf.” 9 The woman of Tekoa answered him, “Upon me and my family be the blame, my lord king; the king and his throne are innocent.” 10 Then the king said, “If anyone says a word to you, have him brought to me, and he shall not touch you again.” 11 But she said, “Please, let the king remember the Lord your God, that the avenger of blood may not go too far in destruction and that my son may not be done away with.” He replied, “As the Lord lives, not a hair of your son shall fall to the ground.”
12 But the woman continued, “Please let your servant say still another word to my lord the king.” He replied, “Speak.” 13 So the woman said: “Why, then, do you think the way you do against the people of God? In pronouncing as he has, the king shows himself guilty, in not bringing back his own banished son. 14 We must indeed die; we are then like water that is poured out on the ground and cannot be gathered up. Yet, though God does not bring back to life, he does devise means so as not to banish[b] anyone from him. 
    15: And now, if I have presumed to speak to the king of this matter, it is because the people have given me cause to fear. And so your servant thought: ‘Let me speak to the king. Perhaps he will grant the petition of his servant. 
    16: For the king must surely listen and rescue his servant from the grasp of one who would destroy both me and my son from the heritage of God.’ 
    17: And your servant says, ‘Let the word of my lord the king lead to rest; indeed, my lord the king is like an angel of God, discerning good and evil. The Lord your God be with you.’”

    18: The king answered the woman, “Now do not conceal from me anything I may ask you!” The woman said, “Let my lord the king speak.” 
    19: So the king asked, “Is the hand of Joab with you in all this?” And the woman answered: “As you live, my lord the king, it is just as my lord has said, and not otherwise. It was your servant Joab who instructed me and told your servant all these things she was to say. 
    20: Your servant Joab did this in order to approach the matter in a roundabout way. But my lord is wise with the wisdom of an angel of God, knowing all things on earth.”
Absalom’s Return. 
    21: Then the king said to Joab: “I am granting this request. Go and bring back young Absalom.” 
    22: Falling to the ground in homage and blessing the king, Joab said, “This day your servant knows that I am in good favor with you, my lord king, since the king has granted the request of your servant.” 
    23: Joab then went off to Geshur and brought Absalom to Jerusalem. 
    24: But the king said, “Let him go off to his own house; he shall not appear before me.” So Absalom went off to his house and did not appear before the king.

    25: In all Israel there was no man more praised for his beauty than Absalom, flawless from the sole of his foot to the crown of his head. 
    26: When he shaved his head—as he used to do at the end of every year, because his hair became too heavy for him—the hair weighed two hundred shekels according to the royal standard. 
    27: Absalom had three sons born to him, besides a daughter named Tamar, who was a beautiful woman.
Absalom Is Pardoned. 
    28: Absalom lived in Jerusalem for two years without appearing before the king. 
    29: Then he sent a message asking Joab to send him to the king, but Joab would not come to him. Although he asked him a second time, Joab would not come. 
    30: He therefore instructed his servants: “You see Joab’s field that borders mine, where he has barley. Go, set it on fire.” And so Absalom’s servants set the field on fire. Joab’s farmhands came to him with torn garments and told him, “Absalom’s servants set your field on fire.” 
    31: Joab went to Absalom in his house and asked him, “Why have your servants set my field on fire?” 
    32: Absalom answered Joab: “I sent you a message: Come here, that I may send you to the king to say: ‘Why did I come back from Geshur? I would be better off if I were still there!’ Now, let me appear before the king. If I am guilty, let him put me to death.” 
    33: Joab went to the king and reported this. The king then called Absalom; he came to him and in homage fell on his face to the ground before the king. Then the king kissed Absalom.


  Chapter 15.

    1: 
Absalom’s Ambition. 1 After this, Absalom provided himself with chariots, horses, and a retinue of fifty. 
    2: Moreover, Absalom used to rise early and stand alongside the road leading to the gate. If someone had a lawsuit to be decided by the king, Absalom would call to him and say, “From what city are you?” And when he replied, “Your servant is of such and such a tribe of Israel,” 
    3: Absalom would say to him, “Your case is good and just, but there is no one to hear you in the king’s name.” 
    4: 
    5: Absalom’s Ambition. 1 After this, Absalom provided himself with chariots, horses, and a retinue of fifty. 2 Moreover, Absalom used to rise early and stand alongside the road leading to the gate. If someone had a lawsuit to be decided by the king, Absalom would call to him and say, “From what city are you?” And when he replied, “Your servant is of such and such a tribe of Israel,” 3 Absalom would say to him, “Your case is good and just, but there is no one to hear you in the king’s name.” 4 And he would continue: “If only I could be appointed judge in the land! Then everyone who has a lawsuit to be decided might come to me and I would render him justice.” 5 Whenever a man approached him to show homage, he would extend his hand, hold him, and kiss him. 
    6: By behaving in this way toward all the Israelites who came to the king for judgment, Absalom was stealing the heart of Israel.
Conspiracy in Hebron. 
    7: After a period of four years, Absalom said to the king: “Please let me go to Hebron and fulfill a vow I made to the Lord. 
    8: For while living in Geshur in Aram, your servant made this vow: ‘If the Lord ever brings me back to Jerusalem, I will worship him in Hebron.’” 
    9: he king said to him, “Go in peace,” and he went off to Hebron. 
    10: Then Absalom sent agents throughout the tribes of Israel to say, “When you hear the sound of the horn, say, ‘Absalom is king in Hebron!’” 
    11: Two hundred men had accompanied Absalom from Jerusalem. They had been invited and went in all innocence, knowing nothing. 
    12: Absalom also sent to Ahithophel the Gilonite, David’s counselor, an invitation to come from his town, Giloh, for the sacrifices he was about to offer. So the conspiracy gained strength, and the people with Absalom increased in numbers.
David Flees Jerusalem. 
    13: An informant came to David with the report, “The Israelites have given their hearts to Absalom, and they are following him.” 
    14: 
    15: Absalom’s Ambition. 1 After this, Absalom provided himself with chariots, horses, and a retinue of fifty. 2 Moreover, Absalom used to rise early and stand alongside the road leading to the gate. If someone had a lawsuit to be decided by the king, Absalom would call to him and say, “From what city are you?” And when he replied, “Your servant is of such and such a tribe of Israel,” 3 Absalom would say to him, “Your case is good and just, but there is no one to hear you in the king’s name.” 4 And he would continue: “If only I could be appointed judge in the land! Then everyone who has a lawsuit to be decided might come to me and I would render him justice.” 5 Whenever a man approached him to show homage, he would extend his hand, hold him, and kiss him. 6 By behaving in this way toward all the Israelites who came to the king for judgment, Absalom was stealing the heart of Israel.
Conspiracy in Hebron. 7 After a period of four years, Absalom said to the king: “Please let me go to Hebron and fulfill a vow I made to the Lord. 8 For while living in Geshur in Aram, your servant made this vow: ‘If the Lord ever brings me back to Jerusalem, I will worship him in Hebron.’” 9 The king said to him, “Go in peace,” and he went off to Hebron. 10 Then Absalom sent agents throughout the tribes of Israel to say, “When you hear the sound of the horn, say, ‘Absalom is king in Hebron!’” 11 Two hundred men had accompanied Absalom from Jerusalem. They had been invited and went in all innocence, knowing nothing. 12 Absalom also sent to Ahithophel the Gilonite, David’s counselor, an invitation to come from his town, Giloh, for the sacrifices he was about to offer. So the conspiracy gained strength, and the people with Absalom increased in numbers.
David Flees Jerusalem. 13 An informant came to David with the report, “The Israelites have given their hearts to Absalom, and they are following him.” 14 At this, David said to all his servants who were with him in Jerusalem: “Get up, let us flee, or none of us will escape from Absalom. Leave at once, or he will quickly overtake us, and then bring disaster upon us, and put the city to the sword.” 15 The king’s servants answered him, “Whatever our lord the king chooses to do, we are your servants.” 
    16: Then the king set out, accompanied by his entire household, except for ten concubines whom he left behind to care for the palace. 
    17: As the king left the city, with all his officers accompanying him, they halted opposite the ascent of the Mount of Olives, at a distance, 
    18: while the whole army marched past him.
David and Ittai. As all the Cherethites and Pelethites, and the six hundred Gittites who had entered his service from that city, were passing in review before the king, 
    19: the king said to Ittai the Gittite: “Why should you also go with us? Go back and stay with the king, for you are a foreigner and you, too, are an exile from your own country. 
    20: You came only yesterday, and today shall I have you wander off with us wherever I have to go? Return and take your brothers with you, and may the Lord show you kindness and fidelity.” 
    21: But Ittai answered the king, “As the Lord lives, and as my lord the king lives, your servant shall be wherever my lord the king is, whether for death or for life.” 
    22: So the king said to Ittai, “Go, then, march on.” And Ittai the Gittite, with all his men and all the dependents that were with him, marched on. 
    23: The whole land wept aloud as the last of the soldiers went by, and the king crossed the Wadi Kidron with all the soldiers moving on ahead of him by way of the ascent of the Mount of Olives, toward the wilderness.
David and the Priests. 
    24: Zadok, too, and all the Levites bearing the ark of the covenant of God set down the ark of God until the whole army had finished marching out of the city; and Abiathar came up. 
    25: Then the king said to Zadok: “Take the ark of God back to the city. If I find favor with the Lord, he will bring me back and permit me to see it and its lodging place. 
    26: But if he should say, ‘I am not pleased with you,’ I am ready; let him do to me as he sees fit.” 
    27: The king also said to Zadok the priest: “Look, you and Abiathar return to the city in peace, and both your sons with you, your own son Ahimaaz, and Abiathar’s son Jonathan. 
    28: Remember, I shall be waiting at the fords near the wilderness until a report from you comes to me.” 
    29: So Zadok and Abiathar took the ark of God back to Jerusalem and remained there.

    30: As David went up the ascent of the Mount of Olives, he wept without ceasing. His head was covered, and he was walking barefoot. All those who were with him also had their heads covered and were weeping as they went. 
    31: When David was told, “Ahithophel is among the conspirators with Absalom,” he said, “O Lord, turn the counsel of Ahithophel to folly!”
David and Hushai. 
    32: When David reached the top, where God was worshiped, Hushai the Archite was there to meet him, with garments torn and dirt upon his head. 
    33: David said to him: “If you come with me, you will be a burden to me; 
    34: but if you return to the city and say to Absalom, ‘Let me be your servant, O king; I was formerly your father’s servant, but now I will be yours,’ you will thwart for me the counsel of Ahithophel. 
    35: You will have the priests Zadok and Abiathar there with you. If you hear anything from the king’s house, you shall report it to the priests Zadok and Abiathar, 
    36: who have there with them their two sons, Zadok’s son Ahimaaz and Abiathar’s son Jonathan. Through them you shall send on to me whatever you hear.” 
    37: So David’s friend Hushai went into the city, Jerusalem, as Absalom was about to enter it.
New American Bible (Revised Edition) (NABRE)
Scripture texts, prefaces, introductions, footnotes and cross references used in this work are taken from the New American Bible, revised edition © 2010, 1991, 1986, 1970 Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, DC All Rights Reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the copyright owner.

  Chapter 16.

    1: 
David and Ziba. 1 David went a little beyond the top and Ziba, the servant of Meribbaal, was there to meet him with saddled donkeys laden with two hundred loaves of bread, an ephah of cakes of pressed raisins, an ephah of summer fruits, and a skin of wine. 
    2: The king said to Ziba, “What are you doing with all this?” Ziba replied: “The donkeys are for the king’s household to ride on. The bread and summer fruits are for your servants to eat, and the wine to drink when they grow weary in the wilderness.” 
    3: Then the king said, “And where is your lord’s son?” Ziba answered the king, “He is staying in Jerusalem, for he said, ‘Today the house of Israel will restore to me my father’s kingdom.’” 
    4: The king therefore said to Ziba, “So! Everything Meribbaal had is yours.” Then Ziba said: “I pay you homage, my lord the king. May I find favor with you!”
David and Shimei. 
    5: 
    6: David and Ziba. 1 David went a little beyond the top and Ziba, the servant of Meribbaal, was there to meet him with saddled donkeys laden with two hundred loaves of bread, an ephah of cakes of pressed raisins, an ephah of summer fruits, and a skin of wine. 2 The king said to Ziba, “What are you doing with all this?” Ziba replied: “The donkeys are for the king’s household to ride on. The bread and summer fruits are for your servants to eat, and the wine to drink when they grow weary in the wilderness.” 3 Then the king said, “And where is your lord’s son?” Ziba answered the king, “He is staying in Jerusalem, for he said, ‘Today the house of Israel will restore to me my father’s kingdom.’” 4 The king therefore said to Ziba, “So! Everything Meribbaal had is yours.” Then Ziba said: “I pay you homage, my lord the king. May I find favor with you!”
David and Shimei. 5 As King David was approaching Bahurim, there was a man coming out; he was of the same clan as the house of Saul, and his name was Shimei, son of Gera. He kept cursing as he came out, 6 and throwing stones at David and at all King David’s officers, even though all the soldiers, including the royal guard, were on David’s right and on his left. 
    7: Shimei was saying as he cursed: “Get out! Get out! You man of blood, you scoundrel! 
    8: The Lord has paid you back for all the blood shed from the family of Saul, whom you replaced as king, and the Lord has handed over the kingdom to your son Absalom. And now look at you: you suffer ruin because you are a man of blood.” 
    9: bishai, son of Zeruiah, said to the king: “Why should this dead dog curse my lord the king? Let me go over and take off his head.” 
    10: But the king replied: “What business is it of mine or of yours, sons of Zeruiah, that he curses? Suppose the Lord has told him to curse David; who then will dare to say, ‘Why are you doing this?’” 
    11: Then David said to Abishai and to all his servants: “If my own son, who came forth from my loins, is seeking my life, how much more might this Benjaminite do so! Let him alone and let him curse, for the Lord has told him to. 
    12: Perhaps the Lord will look upon my affliction and repay me with good for the curses he is uttering this day.” 
    13: David and his men continued on the road, while Shimei kept up with them on the hillside, all the while cursing and throwing stones and dirt as he went. 
    14: The king and all the soldiers with him arrived at the Jordan tired out, and stopped there to rest.
Absalom’s Counselors. 
    15: 
    16: David and Ziba. 1 David went a little beyond the top and Ziba, the servant of Meribbaal, was there to meet him with saddled donkeys laden with two hundred loaves of bread, an ephah of cakes of pressed raisins, an ephah of summer fruits, and a skin of wine. 2 The king said to Ziba, “What are you doing with all this?” Ziba replied: “The donkeys are for the king’s household to ride on. The bread and summer fruits are for your servants to eat, and the wine to drink when they grow weary in the wilderness.” 3 Then the king said, “And where is your lord’s son?” Ziba answered the king, “He is staying in Jerusalem, for he said, ‘Today the house of Israel will restore to me my father’s kingdom.’” 4 The king therefore said to Ziba, “So! Everything Meribbaal had is yours.” Then Ziba said: “I pay you homage, my lord the king. May I find favor with you!”
David and Shimei. 5 As King David was approaching Bahurim, there was a man coming out; he was of the same clan as the house of Saul, and his name was Shimei, son of Gera. He kept cursing as he came out, 6 and throwing stones at David and at all King David’s officers, even though all the soldiers, including the royal guard, were on David’s right and on his left. 7 Shimei was saying as he cursed: “Get out! Get out! You man of blood, you scoundrel! 8 The Lord has paid you back for all the blood shed from the family of Saul, whom you replaced as king, and the Lord has handed over the kingdom to your son Absalom. And now look at you: you suffer ruin because you are a man of blood.” 9 Abishai, son of Zeruiah, said to the king: “Why should this dead dog curse my lord the king? Let me go over and take off his head.” 10 But the king replied: “What business is it of mine or of yours, sons of Zeruiah, that he curses? Suppose the Lord has told him to curse David; who then will dare to say, ‘Why are you doing this?’” 11 Then David said to Abishai and to all his servants: “If my own son, who came forth from my loins, is seeking my life, how much more might this Benjaminite do so! Let him alone and let him curse, for the Lord has told him to. 12 Perhaps the Lord will look upon my affliction and repay me with good for the curses he is uttering this day.” 13 David and his men continued on the road, while Shimei kept up with them on the hillside, all the while cursing and throwing stones and dirt as he went. 14 The king and all the soldiers with him arrived at the Jordan tired out, and stopped there to rest.
Absalom’s Counselors. 15 In the meantime Absalom, with all the Israelites, entered Jerusalem, and Ahithophel was with him. 16 When David’s friend Hushai the Archite came to Absalom, he said to him: “Long live the king! Long live the king!” 
    17: But Absalom asked Hushai: “Is this your devotion to your friend? Why did you not go with your friend?” 
    18: Hushai replied to Absalom: “On the contrary, I am his whom the Lord and all this people and all Israel have chosen, and with him I will stay. 
    19: Furthermore, as I was in attendance upon your father, so will I be before you. Whom should I serve, if not his son?”

    20: Then Absalom said to Ahithophel, “Offer your counsel on what we should do.” 
    21: Ahithophel replied to Absalom: “Go to your father’s concubines, whom he left behind to take care of the palace. When all Israel hears how odious you have made yourself to your father, all those on your side will take courage.” 
    22: So a tent was pitched on the roof for Absalom, and Absalom went to his father’s concubines in view of all Israel.
Counsel of Ahithophel. 
    23: Now the counsel given by Ahithophel at that time was as though one sought the word of God. Such was all the counsel of Ahithophel both to David and to Absalom.


End of day 73.