Day 51:

Reading Joshua, chapters ['9', '10', '11', '12']:

  Chapter 9.

    1: When the news reached all the kings west of the Jordan, in the mountain regions and in the Shephelah, and all along the coast of the Great Sea as far as the Lebanon: Hittites, Amorites, Canaanites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites, 
    2: they gathered together to launch a common attack against Joshua and Israel.
The Gibeonite Deception. 
    3: On hearing what Joshua had done to Jericho and Ai, the inhabitants of Gibeon 
    4: formed their own scheme. They chose provisions for a journey, making use of old sacks for their donkeys, and old wineskins, torn and mended. 
    5: They wore old, patched sandals and shabby garments; and all the bread they took was dry and crumbly. 
    6: Thus they journeyed to Joshua in the camp at Gilgal, where they said to him and to the Israelites, “We have come from a far-off land; now, make a covenant with us.” 
    7: But the Israelites replied to the Hivites, “You may be living in land that is ours. How, then, can we make a covenant with you?” 
    8: 
    9: onfederacy Against Israel. 1 When the news reached all the kings west of the Jordan, in the mountain regions and in the Shephelah, and all along the coast of the Great Sea as far as the Lebanon: Hittites, Amorites, Canaanites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites, 2 they gathered together to launch a common attack against Joshua and Israel.
The Gibeonite Deception. 3 On hearing what Joshua had done to Jericho and Ai, the inhabitants of Gibeon 4 formed their own scheme. They chose provisions for a journey, making use of old sacks for their donkeys, and old wineskins, torn and mended. 5 They wore old, patched sandals and shabby garments; and all the bread they took was dry and crumbly. 6 Thus they journeyed to Joshua in the camp at Gilgal, where they said to him and to the Israelites, “We have come from a far-off land; now, make a covenant with us.” 7 But the Israelites replied to the Hivites, “You may be living in land that is ours. How, then, can we make a covenant with you?” 8 But they answered Joshua, “We are your servants.” Then Joshua asked them, “Who are you? Where do you come from?” 9 They answered him, “Your servants have come from a far-off land, because of the fame of the Lord, your God. For we have heard reports of all that he did in Egypt 
    10: and all that he did to the two kings of the Amorites beyond the Jordan, Sihon, king of Heshbon, and Og, king of Bashan, who lived in Ashtaroth. 
    11: So our elders and all the inhabitants of our land said to us, ‘Take along provisions for the journey and go to meet them. Say to them: “We are your servants; now make a covenant with us.”’ 
    12: This bread of ours was still warm when we brought it from home as provisions the day we left to come to you, but now it is dry and crumbly. 
    13: Here are our wineskins, which were new when we filled them, but now they are torn. Look at our garments and sandals; they are worn out from the very long journey.” 
    14: Then the Israelite leaders partook of their provisions, without inquiring of the Lord. 
    15: So Joshua made peace with them and made a covenant to let them live, which the leaders of the community sealed with an oath.
Gibeonites Made Vassals. 
    16: Three days after the covenant was made, the Israelites heard that these people were from nearby, and would be living in Israel. 
    17: The third day on the road, the Israelites came to their cities of Gibeon, Chephirah, Beeroth, and Kiriath-jearim, 
    18: but did not attack them, because the leaders of the community had sworn to them by the Lord, the God of Israel. When the entire community grumbled against the leaders, 
    19: these all remonstrated with the community, “We have sworn to them by the Lord, the God of Israel, and so we cannot harm them. 
    20: Let us therefore let them live, and so deal with them that no wrath fall upon us because of the oath we have sworn to them.” 
    21: Thus the leaders said to them, “Let them live, and become hewers of wood and drawers of water for the entire community.” So the community did as the leaders advised them.

    22: Joshua summoned the Gibeonites and said to them, “Why did you deceive us and say, ‘We live far off from you’?—You live among us! 
    23: Now are you accursed: every one of you shall always be a slave, hewers of wood and drawers of water, for the house of my God.” 
    24: They answered Joshua, “Your servants were fully informed of how the Lord, your God, commanded Moses his servant that you be given the entire land and that all its inhabitants be destroyed before you. Since, therefore, at your advance, we were in great fear for our lives, we acted as we did. 
    25: And now that we are in your power, do with us what is good and right in your eyes.” 
    26: Joshua did what he had decided: while he saved them from being killed by the Israelites, 
    27: on that day he made them, as they still are, hewers of wood and drawers of water for the community and for the altar of the Lord, in the place the Lord would choose.


  Chapter 10.

    1: 
The Siege of Gibeon. 1 Now when Adonizedek, king of Jerusalem, heard that Joshua had captured Ai and put it under the ban, and had done to that city and its king as he had done to Jericho and its king, and that the inhabitants of Gibeon had made their peace with Israel, remaining among them, 
    2: there was great fear abroad, because Gibeon was a great city, like one of the royal cities, greater even than Ai, and all its men were warriors. 
    3: So Adonizedek, king of Jerusalem, sent to Hoham, king of Hebron, Piram, king of Jarmuth, Japhia, king of Lachish, and Debir, king of Eglon, with this message: 
    4: “Come and help me attack Gibeon, for it has made peace with Joshua and the Israelites.” 
    5: The five Amorite kings, of Jerusalem, Hebron, Jarmuth, Lachish, and Eglon, gathered with all their forces, and marched against Gibeon to make war on it. 
    6: Thereupon, the Gibeonites sent an appeal to Joshua in his camp at Gilgal: “Do not abandon your servants. Come up here quickly and save us. Help us, because all the Amorite kings of the mountain country have joined together against us.”
Joshua’s Victory. 
    7: So Joshua marched up from Gilgal with all his army and all his warriors. 
    8: The Lord said to Joshua: Do not fear them, for I have delivered them into your power. Not one of them will be able to withstand you. 
    9: 
    10: The Siege of Gibeon. 1 Now when Adonizedek, king of Jerusalem, heard that Joshua had captured Ai and put it under the ban, and had done to that city and its king as he had done to Jericho and its king, and that the inhabitants of Gibeon had made their peace with Israel, remaining among them, 2 there was great fear abroad, because Gibeon was a great city, like one of the royal cities, greater even than Ai, and all its men were warriors. 3 So Adonizedek, king of Jerusalem, sent to Hoham, king of Hebron, Piram, king of Jarmuth, Japhia, king of Lachish, and Debir, king of Eglon, with this message: 4 “Come and help me attack Gibeon, for it has made peace with Joshua and the Israelites.” 5 The five Amorite kings, of Jerusalem, Hebron, Jarmuth, Lachish, and Eglon, gathered with all their forces, and marched against Gibeon to make war on it. 6 Thereupon, the Gibeonites sent an appeal to Joshua in his camp at Gilgal: “Do not abandon your servants. Come up here quickly and save us. Help us, because all the Amorite kings of the mountain country have joined together against us.”
Joshua’s Victory. 7 So Joshua marched up from Gilgal with all his army and all his warriors. 8 The Lord said to Joshua: Do not fear them, for I have delivered them into your power. Not one of them will be able to withstand you. 9 After an all-night march from Gilgal, Joshua made a surprise attack upon them, 10 and the Lord threw them into disorder before Israel. The Israelites inflicted a great slaughter on them at Gibeon and pursued them down the Beth-horon slope, attacking them as far as Azekah and Makkedah.

    11: While they fled before Israel along the descent of Beth-horon, the Lord hurled great stones from the heavens above them all the way to Azekah, killing many. More died from these hailstones than the Israelites killed with the sword. 
    12: It was then, when the Lord delivered up the Amorites to the Israelites, that Joshua prayed to the Lord, and said in the presence of Israel:
Sun, stand still at Gibeon,
    Moon, in the valley of Aijalon!

    13: 
The sun stood still,
    the moon stayed,
    while the nation took vengeance on its foes.
This is recorded in the Book of Jashar. The sun halted halfway across the heavens; not for an entire day did it press on. 
    14: Never before or since was there a day like this, when the Lord obeyed the voice of a man; for the Lord fought for Israel. 
    15: Then Joshua and all Israel returned to the camp at Gilgal.
Execution of Amorite Kings. 
    16: The five kings who had fled hid in the cave at Makkedah. 
    17: When Joshua was told, “The five kings have been found, hiding in the cave at Makkedah,” 
    18: he said, “Roll large stones to the mouth of the cave and post guards over it. 
    19: But do not remain there yourselves. Pursue your enemies, and harry them in the rear. Do not allow them to reach their cities, for the Lord, your God, has delivered them into your power.”

    20: Once Joshua and the Israelites had finally inflicted the last blows in this very great slaughter, and the survivors had escaped from them into the fortified cities, 
    21: all the army returned to Joshua and the camp at Makkedah in victory; no one uttered a sound against the Israelites. 
    22: Then Joshua said, “Open the mouth of the cave and bring me those five kings from the cave.” 
    23: They did so; they brought out to him from the cave the five kings, of Jerusalem, Hebron, Jarmuth, Lachish, and Eglon. 
    24: When they brought the five kings out to Joshua, he summoned all the army of Israel and said to the commanders of the soldiers who had marched with him, “Come forward and put your feet on the necks of these kings.” They came forward and put their feet upon their necks. 
    25: Then Joshua said to them, “Do not be afraid or dismayed, be firm and steadfast. This is what the Lord will do to all the enemies against whom you fight.” 
    26: Thereupon Joshua struck and killed the kings, and hanged them on five trees, where they remained hanging until evening. 
    27: At sunset Joshua commanded that they be taken down from the trees and be thrown into the cave where they had hidden; over the mouth of the cave large stones were placed, which remain until this very day.
Conquest of Southern Canaan. 
    28: Makkedah, too, Joshua captured and put to the sword at that time. He put the city, its king, and every person in it under the ban, leaving no survivors. Thus he did to the king of Makkedah what he had done to the king of Jericho. 
    29: Joshua then passed on with all Israel from Makkedah to Libnah, and attacked it, 
    30: and the Lord delivered it, with its king, into the power of Israel. He put it to the sword with every person there, leaving no survivors. Thus he did to its king what he had done to the king of Jericho. 
    31: Joshua next passed on with all Israel from Libnah to Lachish, where they set up a camp during the attack. 
    32: The Lord delivered Lachish into the power of Israel, so that on the second day Joshua captured it and put it to the sword with every person in it, just as he had done to Libnah. 
    33: At that time Horam, king of Gezer, came up to help Lachish, but Joshua defeated him and his people, leaving him no survivors. 
    34: From Lachish, Joshua passed on with all Israel to Eglon; encamping near it, they attacked it 
    35: and captured it the same day, putting it to the sword. On that day he put under the ban every person in it, just as he had done at Lachish. 
    36: From Eglon, Joshua went up with all Israel to Hebron, which they attacked 
    37: and captured. They put it to the sword with its king, all its cities, and every person there, leaving no survivors, just as Joshua had done to Eglon. He put it under the ban and every person in it. 
    38: Then Joshua and all Israel turned back to Debir and attacked it, 
    39: capturing it with its king and all its cities. They put them to the sword and put under the ban every person in it, leaving no survivors. Thus he did to Debir and its king what he had done to Hebron, as well as to Libnah and its king.

    40: Joshua conquered the entire land; the mountain regions, the Negeb, the Shephelah, and the mountain slopes, with all their kings. He left no survivors, but put under the ban every living being, just as the Lord, the God of Israel, had commanded. 
    41: Joshua conquered them from Kadesh-barnea to Gaza, and all the land of Goshen to Gibeon. 
    42: All these kings and their lands Joshua captured all at once, for the Lord, the God of Israel, fought for Israel. 
    43: Thereupon Joshua with all Israel returned to the camp at Gilgal.


  Chapter 11.

    1: 
Northern Confederacy. 1 When Jabin, king of Hazor, learned of this, he sent a message to Jobab, king of Madon, to the king of Shimron, to the king of Achshaph, 
    2: and to the northern kings in the mountain regions and in the Arabah near Chinneroth, in the Shephelah, and in Naphath-dor to the west. 
    3: These were Canaanites to the east and west, Amorites, Hittites, Perizzites, and Jebusites in the mountain regions, and Hivites at the foot of Hermon in the land of Mizpah. 
    4: They came out with all their troops, an army numerous as the sands on the seashore, and with a multitude of horses and chariots. 
    5: All these kings made a pact and together they marched to the waters of Merom, where they encamped to fight against Israel.

    6: The Lord said to Joshua, “Do not fear them, for by this time tomorrow I will present them slain to Israel. You must hamstring their horses and burn their chariots.” 
    7: Joshua with his whole army came upon them suddenly at the waters of Merom and fell upon them. 
    8: The Lord delivered them into the power of the Israelites, who defeated them and pursued them to Greater Sidon, to Misrephoth-maim, and eastward to the valley of Mizpeh. They struck them all down, leaving no survivors. 
    9: oshua did to them as the Lord had commanded: he hamstrung their horses and burned their chariots.
Conquest of Northern Canaan. 
    10: 
    11: Northern Confederacy. 1 When Jabin, king of Hazor, learned of this, he sent a message to Jobab, king of Madon, to the king of Shimron, to the king of Achshaph, 2 and to the northern kings in the mountain regions and in the Arabah near Chinneroth, in the Shephelah, and in Naphath-dor to the west. 3 These were Canaanites to the east and west, Amorites, Hittites, Perizzites, and Jebusites in the mountain regions, and Hivites at the foot of Hermon in the land of Mizpah. 4 They came out with all their troops, an army numerous as the sands on the seashore, and with a multitude of horses and chariots. 5 All these kings made a pact and together they marched to the waters of Merom,[b] where they encamped to fight against Israel.
6 The Lord said to Joshua, “Do not fear them, for by this time tomorrow I will present them slain to Israel. You must hamstring their horses and burn their chariots.” 7 Joshua with his whole army came upon them suddenly at the waters of Merom and fell upon them. 8 The Lord delivered them into the power of the Israelites, who defeated them and pursued them to Greater Sidon, to Misrephoth-maim, and eastward to the valley of Mizpeh. They struck them all down, leaving no survivors. 9 Joshua did to them as the Lord had commanded: he hamstrung their horses and burned their chariots.
Conquest of Northern Canaan. 10 At that time Joshua, turning back, captured Hazor and struck down its king with the sword; for Hazor formerly was the chief of all those kingdoms. 11 He also struck down with the sword every person there, carrying out the ban, till none was left alive. Hazor itself he burned. 
    12: All the cities of those kings, and the kings themselves, Joshua captured and put to the sword, carrying out the ban on them, as Moses, the servant of the Lord, had commanded. 
    13: However, Israel did not destroy by fire any of the cities built on their mounds, except Hazor, which Joshua burned. 
    14: All the spoil and livestock of these cities the Israelites took as plunder; but the people they put to the sword, until they had destroyed the last of them, leaving none alive. 
    15: As the Lord had commanded his servant Moses, so Moses commanded Joshua, and Joshua acted accordingly. He left nothing undone that the Lord had commanded Moses should be done.
Survey of the Conquest. 
    16: So Joshua took all this land: the mountain regions, the entire Negeb, all the land of Goshen, the Shephelah, the Arabah, as well as the mountain regions and Shephelah of Israel, 
    17: from Mount Halak that rises toward Seir as far as Baal-gad in the Lebanon valley at the foot of Mount Hermon. All their kings he captured and put to death. 
    18: Joshua waged war against all these kings for a long time. 
    19: With the exception of the Hivites who lived in Gibeon, no city made peace with the Israelites; all were taken in battle. 
    20: For it was the Lord’s doing to make their hearts obstinate to meet Israel in battle, that they might be put under the ban without mercy, and be destroyed as the Lord had commanded Moses.

    21: At that time Joshua penetrated the mountain regions and exterminated the Anakim in Hebron, Debir, Anab, the entire mountain region of Judah, and the entire mountain region of Israel. Joshua put them and their cities under the ban, 
    22: so that no Anakim were left in the land of the Israelites. However, some survived in Gaza, in Gath, and in Ashdod. 
    23: Thus Joshua took the whole land, just as the Lord had said to Moses. Joshua gave it to Israel as their heritage, apportioning it among the tribes. And the land had rest from war.


  Chapter 12.

    1: 
    2: a]
Lists of Conquered Kings. 1 These are the kings of the land whom the Israelites conquered and whose lands they occupied, east of the Jordan, from the River Arnon to Mount Hermon, including all the eastern section of the Arabah: 2 First, Sihon, king of the Amorites, who lived in Heshbon. His domain extended from Aroer, which is on the bank of the Wadi Arnon, to include the wadi itself, and the land northward through half of Gilead to the Wadi Jabbok at the border with the Ammonites, 
    3: as well as the Arabah from the eastern side of the Sea of Chinnereth, as far south as the eastern side of the Salt Sea of the Arabah in the direction of Beth-jeshimoth, southward under the slopes of Pisgah. 
    4: Secondly, the border of Og, king of Bashan, a survivor of the Rephaim, who lived at Ashtaroth and Edrei. 
    5: He ruled over Mount Hermon, Salecah, and all Bashan as far as the boundary of the Geshurites and Maacathites, and over half of Gilead as far as the territory of Sihon, king of Heshbon. 
    6: It was Moses, the servant of the Lord, and the Israelites who conquered them; Moses, the servant of the Lord, gave possession of their land to the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh.

    7: This is a list of the kings of the land whom Joshua and the Israelites conquered west of the Jordan, from Baal-gad in the Lebanon valley to Mount Halak which rises toward Seir; Joshua apportioned their land and gave possession of it to the tribes of Israel; 
    8: it included the mountain regions and Shephelah, the Arabah, the slopes, the wilderness, and the Negeb, belonging to the Hittites, Amorites, Canaanites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites: 
    9: he king of Jericho, one; the king of Ai, which is near Bethel, one; 
    10: the king of Jerusalem, one; the king of Hebron, one; 
    11: 
    12: a]
Lists of Conquered Kings. 1 These are the kings of the land whom the Israelites conquered and whose lands they occupied, east of the Jordan, from the River Arnon to Mount Hermon, including all the eastern section of the Arabah: 2 First, Sihon, king of the Amorites, who lived in Heshbon. His domain extended from Aroer, which is on the bank of the Wadi Arnon, to include the wadi itself, and the land northward through half of Gilead to the Wadi Jabbok at the border with the Ammonites, 3 as well as the Arabah from the eastern side of the Sea of Chinnereth, as far south as the eastern side of the Salt Sea of the Arabah in the direction of Beth-jeshimoth, southward under the slopes of Pisgah. 4 Secondly, the border of Og, king of Bashan, a survivor of the Rephaim, who lived at Ashtaroth and Edrei. 5 He ruled over Mount Hermon, Salecah, and all Bashan as far as the boundary of the Geshurites and Maacathites, and over half of Gilead as far as the territory of Sihon, king of Heshbon. 6 It was Moses, the servant of the Lord, and the Israelites who conquered them; Moses, the servant of the Lord, gave possession of their land to the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh.
7 This is a list of the kings of the land whom Joshua and the Israelites conquered west of the Jordan, from Baal-gad in the Lebanon valley to Mount Halak which rises toward Seir; Joshua apportioned their land and gave possession of it to the tribes of Israel; 8 it included the mountain regions and Shephelah, the Arabah, the slopes, the wilderness, and the Negeb, belonging to the Hittites, Amorites, Canaanites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites: 9 The king of Jericho, one; the king of Ai, which is near Bethel, one; 10 the king of Jerusalem, one; the king of Hebron, one; 11 the king of Jarmuth, one; the king of Lachish, one; 12 the king of Eglon, one; the king of Gezer, one; 
    13: the king of Debir, one; the king of Geder, one; 
    14: the king of Hormah, one; the king of Arad, one; 
    15: the king of Libnah, one; the king of Adullam, one; 
    16: the king of Makkedah, one; the king of Bethel, one; 
    17: the king of Tappuah, one; the king of Hepher, one; 
    18: the king of Aphek, one; the king of Lasharon, one; 
    19: the king of Madon, one; the king of Hazor, one; 
    20: the king of Shimron, one; the king of Achshaph, one; 
    21: the king of Taanach, one; the king of Megiddo, one; 
    22: the king of Kedesh, one; the king of Jokneam, at Carmel, one; 
    23: the king of Dor, in Naphath-dor, one; the king of Goyim at Gilgal, one; 
    24: and the king of Tirzah, one—thirty-one kings in all.


End of day 51.