Day 309:

Reading Acts, chapters ['13', '14', '15', '16']:

  Chapter 13.

    1: 
1 Now there were in the church at Antioch prophets and teachers: Barnabas, Symeon who was called Niger, Lucius of Cyrene, Manaen who was a close friend of Herod the tetrarch, and Saul. 
    2: 
    3: 1 Now there were in the church at Antioch prophets and teachers: Barnabas, Symeon who was called Niger, Lucius of Cyrene, Manaen who was a close friend of Herod the tetrarch, and Saul. 2 While they were worshiping the Lord and fasting, the holy Spirit said, “Set apart for me Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them.” 3 Then, completing their fasting and prayer, they laid hands on them and sent them off.
First Mission Begins in Cyprus. 
    4: So they, sent forth by the holy Spirit, went down to Seleucia and from there sailed to Cyprus. 
    5: When they arrived in Salamis, they proclaimed the word of God in the Jewish synagogues. They had John also as their assistant. 
    6: When they had traveled through the whole island as far as Paphos, they met a magician named Bar-Jesus who was a Jewish false prophet. 
    7: He was with the proconsul Sergius Paulus, a man of intelligence, who had summoned Barnabas and Saul and wanted to hear the word of God. 
    8: But Elymas the magician (for that is what his name means) opposed them in an attempt to turn the proconsul away from the faith. 
    9: ut Saul, also known as Paul, filled with the holy Spirit, looked intently at him 
    10: and said, “You son of the devil, you enemy of all that is right, full of every sort of deceit and fraud. Will you not stop twisting the straight paths of  Lord? 
    11: Even now the hand of the Lord is upon you. You will be blind, and unable to see the sun for a time.” Immediately a dark mist fell upon him, and he went about seeking people to lead him by the hand. 
    12: 
    13: 1 Now there were in the church at Antioch prophets and teachers: Barnabas, Symeon who was called Niger, Lucius of Cyrene, Manaen who was a close friend of Herod the tetrarch, and Saul. 2 While they were worshiping the Lord and fasting, the holy Spirit said, “Set apart for me Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them.” 3 Then, completing their fasting and prayer, they laid hands on them and sent them off.
First Mission Begins in Cyprus. 4 [b]So they, sent forth by the holy Spirit, went down to Seleucia and from there sailed to Cyprus. 5 When they arrived in Salamis, they proclaimed the word of God in the Jewish synagogues. They had John[c] also as their assistant. 6 When they had traveled through the whole island as far as Paphos, they met a magician named Bar-Jesus who was a Jewish false prophet.[d] 7 He was with the proconsul Sergius Paulus, a man of intelligence, who had summoned Barnabas and Saul and wanted to hear the word of God. 8 But Elymas the magician (for that is what his name means) opposed them in an attempt to turn the proconsul away from the faith. 9 But Saul, also known as Paul,[e] filled with the holy Spirit, looked intently at him 10 and said, “You son of the devil, you enemy of all that is right, full of every sort of deceit and fraud. Will you not stop twisting the straight paths of [the] Lord? 11 Even now the hand of the Lord is upon you. You will be blind, and unable to see the sun for a time.” Immediately a dark mist fell upon him, and he went about seeking people to lead him by the hand. 12 When the proconsul saw what had happened, he came to believe, for he was astonished by the teaching about the Lord.
Paul’s Arrival at Antioch in Pisidia. 13 From Paphos, Paul and his companions set sail and arrived at Perga in Pamphylia. But John left them and returned to Jerusalem. 
    14: They continued on from Perga and reached Antioch in Pisidia. On the sabbath they entered  the synagogue and took their seats. 
    15: After the reading of the law and the prophets, the synagogue officials sent word to them, “My brothers, if one of you has a word of exhortation for the people, please speak.”
Paul’s Address in the Synagogue. 
    16: So Paul got up, motioned with his hand, and said, “Fellow Israelites and you others who are God-fearing,[g] listen. 
    17: The God of this people Israel chose our ancestors and exalted the people during their sojourn in the land of Egypt. With uplifted arm he led them out of it 
    18: and for about forty years he put up with them in the desert. 
    19: When he had destroyed seven nations in the land of Canaan, he gave them their land as an inheritance 
    20: at the end of about four hundred and fifty years. After these things he provided judges up to Samuel [the] prophet. 
    21: Then they asked for a king. God gave them Saul, son of Kish, a man from the tribe of Benjamin, for forty years. 
    22: Then he removed him and raised up David as their king; of him he testified, ‘I have found David, son of Jesse, a man after my own heart; he will carry out my every wish.’ 
    23: From this man’s descendants God, according to his promise, has brought to Israel a savior, Jesus. 
    24: John heralded his coming by proclaiming a baptism of repentance to all the people of Israel; 
    25: and as John was completing his course, he would say, ‘What do you suppose that I am? I am not he. Behold, one is coming after me; I am not worthy to unfasten the sandals of his feet.’

    26: “My brothers, children of the family of Abraham, and those others among you who are God-fearing, to us this word of salvation has been sent. 
    27: The inhabitants of Jerusalem and their leaders failed to recognize him, and by condemning him they fulfilled the oracles of the prophets that are read sabbath after sabbath. 
    28: For even though they found no grounds for a death sentence, they asked Pilate to have him put to death, 
    29: and when they had accomplished all that was written about him, they took him down from the tree and placed him in a tomb. 
    30: But God raised him from the dead, 
    31: and for many days he appeared to those who had come up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem. These are  his witnesses before the people.[j] 
    32: We ourselves are proclaiming this good news to you that what God promised our ancestors 
    33: he has brought to fulfillment for us,  children, by raising up Jesus, as it is written in the second psalm, ‘You are my son; this day I have begotten you.’ 
    34: And that he raised him from the dead never to return to corruption he declared in this way, ‘I shall give you the benefits assured to David.’ 
    35: That is why he also says in another psalm, ‘You will not suffer your holy one to see corruption.’ 
    36: Now David, after he had served the will of God in his lifetime, fell asleep, was gathered to his ancestors, and did see corruption. 
    37: But the one whom God raised up did not see corruption. 
    38: You must know, my brothers, that through him forgiveness of sins is being proclaimed to you,  in regard to everything from which you could not be justified[k] under the law of Moses, 
    39: in him every believer is justified. 
    40: Be careful, then, that what was said in the prophets not come about:

    41: 
‘Look on, you scoffers,
    be amazed and disappear.
For I am doing a work in your days,
    a work that you will never believe
    even if someone tells you.’”

    42: As they were leaving, they invited them to speak on these subjects the following sabbath. 
    43: After the congregation had dispersed, many Jews and worshipers who were converts to Judaism followed Paul and Barnabas, who spoke to them and urged them to remain faithful to the grace of God.
Address to the Gentiles. 
    44: On the following sabbath almost the whole city gathered to hear the word of the Lord. 
    45: When the Jews saw the crowds, they were filled with jealousy and with violent abuse contradicted what Paul said. 
    46: Both Paul and Barnabas spoke out boldly and said, “It was necessary that the word of God be spoken to you first, but since you reject it and condemn yourselves as unworthy of eternal life, we now turn to the Gentiles. 
    47: For so the Lord has commanded us, ‘I have made you a light to the Gentiles, that you may be an instrument of salvation to the ends of the earth.’”

    48: The Gentiles were delighted when they heard this and glorified the word of the Lord. All who were destined for eternal life came to believe, 
    49: and the word of the Lord continued to spread through the whole region. 
    50: The Jews, however, incited the women of prominence who were worshipers and the leading men of the city, stirred up a persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and expelled them from their territory. 
    51: So they shook the dust from their feet in protest against them and went to Iconium. 
    52: The disciples were filled with joy and the holy Spirit.


  Chapter 14.

    1: 
Paul and Barnabas at Iconium. 1 In Iconium they entered the Jewish synagogue together and spoke in such a way that a great number of both Jews and Greeks came to believe, 
    2: although the disbelieving Jews stirred up and poisoned the minds of the Gentiles against the brothers. 
    3: 
    4: Paul and Barnabas at Iconium. 1 In Iconium they entered the Jewish synagogue together and spoke in such a way that a great number of both Jews and Greeks came to believe, 2 although the disbelieving Jews stirred up and poisoned the minds of the Gentiles against the brothers. 3 So they stayed for a considerable period, speaking out boldly for the Lord, who confirmed the word about his grace by granting signs and wonders to occur through their hands. 4 The people of the city were divided: some were with the Jews; others, with the apostles. 
    5: When there was an attempt by both the Gentiles and the Jews, together with their leaders, to attack and stone them, 
    6: they realized it and fled to the Lycaonian cities of Lystra and Derbe and to the surrounding countryside, 
    7: where they continued to proclaim the good news.
Paul and Barnabas at Lystra. 
    8: At Lystra there was a crippled man, lame from birth, who had never walked. 
    9: e listened to Paul speaking, who looked intently at him, saw that he had the faith to be healed, 
    10: and called out in a loud voice, “Stand up straight on your feet.” He jumped up and began to walk about. 
    11: When the crowds saw what Paul had done, they cried out in Lycaonian, “The gods have come down to us in human form.” 
    12: They called Barnabas “Zeus” and Paul “Hermes,” because he was the chief speaker. 
    13: 
    14: Paul and Barnabas at Iconium. 1 In Iconium they entered the Jewish synagogue together and spoke in such a way that a great number of both Jews and Greeks came to believe, 2 although the disbelieving Jews stirred up and poisoned the minds of the Gentiles against the brothers. 3 So they stayed for a considerable period, speaking out boldly for the Lord, who confirmed the word about his grace by granting signs and wonders to occur through their hands. 4 The people of the city were divided: some were with the Jews; others, with the apostles. 5 When there was an attempt by both the Gentiles and the Jews, together with their leaders, to attack and stone them, 6 they realized it and fled to the Lycaonian cities of Lystra and Derbe and to the surrounding countryside, 7 where they continued to proclaim the good news.
Paul and Barnabas at Lystra. 8 At Lystra there was a crippled man, lame from birth, who had never walked. 9 He listened to Paul speaking, who looked intently at him, saw that he had the faith to be healed, 10 and called out in a loud voice, “Stand up straight on your feet.” He jumped up and began to walk about. 11 When the crowds saw what Paul had done, they cried out in Lycaonian, “The gods have come down to us in human form.” 12 They called Barnabas “Zeus”[b] and Paul “Hermes,” because he was the chief speaker. 13 And the priest of Zeus, whose temple was at the entrance to the city, brought oxen and garlands to the gates, for he together with the people intended to offer sacrifice.
14 The apostles Barnabas and Paul tore their garments[c] when they heard this and rushed out into the crowd, shouting, 
    15: “Men, why are you doing this? We are of the same nature as you, human beings. We proclaim to you good news that you should turn from these idols to the living God, ‘who made heaven and earth and sea and all that is in them.’ 
    16: In past generations he allowed all Gentiles to go their own ways; 
    17: yet, in bestowing his goodness, he did not leave himself without witness, for he gave you rains from heaven and fruitful seasons, and filled you with nourishment and gladness for your hearts.” 
    18: Even with these words, they scarcely restrained the crowds from offering sacrifice to them.

    19: However, some Jews from Antioch and Iconium arrived and won over the crowds. They stoned Paul and dragged him out of the city, supposing that he was dead. 
    20: But when the disciples gathered around him, he got up and entered the city. On the following day he left with Barnabas for Derbe.
End of the First Mission. 
    21: After they had proclaimed the good news to that city and made a considerable number of disciples, they returned to Lystra and to Iconium and to Antioch. 
    22: They strengthened the spirits of the disciples and exhorted them to persevere in the faith, saying, “It is necessary for us to undergo many hardships to enter the kingdom of God.” 
    23: They appointed presbyters for them in each church and, with prayer and fasting, commended them to the Lord in whom they had put their faith. 
    24: Then they traveled through Pisidia and reached Pamphylia. 
    25: After proclaiming the word at Perga they went down to Attalia. 
    26: From there they sailed to Antioch, where they had been commended to the grace of God for the work they had now accomplished. 
    27: And when they arrived, they called the church together and reported what God had done with them and how he had opened the door of faith to the Gentiles. 
    28: Then they spent no little time with the disciples.


  Chapter 15.

    1: 
Council of Jerusalem. 1 Some who had come down from Judea were instructing the brothers, “Unless you are circumcised according to the Mosaic practice, you cannot be saved.”[b] 
    2: Because there arose no little dissension and debate by Paul and Barnabas with them, it was decided that Paul, Barnabas, and some of the others should go up to Jerusalem to the apostles and presbyters about this question. 
    3: They were sent on their journey by the church, and passed through Phoenicia and Samaria telling of the conversion of the Gentiles, and brought great joy to all the brothers. 
    4: 
    5: Council of Jerusalem. 1 Some who had come down from Judea were instructing the brothers, “Unless you are circumcised according to the Mosaic practice, you cannot be saved.”[b] 2 Because there arose no little dissension and debate by Paul and Barnabas with them, it was decided that Paul, Barnabas, and some of the others should go up to Jerusalem to the apostles and presbyters about this question. 3 They were sent on their journey by the church, and passed through Phoenicia and Samaria telling of the conversion of the Gentiles, and brought great joy to all the brothers. 4 When they arrived in Jerusalem, they were welcomed by the church, as well as by the apostles and the presbyters, and they reported what God had done with them. 5 But some from the party of the Pharisees who had become believers stood up and said, “It is necessary to circumcise them and direct them to observe the Mosaic law.”

    6: The apostles and the presbyters met together to see about this matter. 
    7: After much debate had taken place, Peter got up and said to them, “My brothers, you are well aware that from early days God made his choice among you that through my mouth the Gentiles would hear the word of the gospel and believe. 
    8: And God, who knows the heart, bore witness by granting them the holy Spirit just as he did us. 
    9: e made no distinction between us and them, for by faith he purified their hearts. 
    10: Why, then, are you now putting God to the test by placing on the shoulders of the disciples a yoke that neither our ancestors nor we have been able to bear? 
    11: On the contrary, we believe that we are saved through the grace of the Lord Jesus, in the same way as they.” 
    12: The whole assembly fell silent, and they listened while Paul and Barnabas described the signs and wonders God had worked among the Gentiles through them.
James on Dietary Law. 
    13: After they had fallen silent, James responded, “My brothers, listen to me. 
    14: 
    15: Council of Jerusalem. 1 Some who had come down from Judea were instructing the brothers, “Unless you are circumcised according to the Mosaic practice, you cannot be saved.”[b] 2 Because there arose no little dissension and debate by Paul and Barnabas with them, it was decided that Paul, Barnabas, and some of the others should go up to Jerusalem to the apostles and presbyters about this question. 3 They were sent on their journey by the church, and passed through Phoenicia and Samaria telling of the conversion of the Gentiles, and brought great joy to all the brothers. 4 When they arrived in Jerusalem, they were welcomed by the church, as well as by the apostles and the presbyters, and they reported what God had done with them. 5 But some from the party of the Pharisees who had become believers stood up and said, “It is necessary to circumcise them and direct them to observe the Mosaic law.”
6 [c]The apostles and the presbyters met together to see about this matter. 7 [d]After much debate had taken place, Peter got up and said to them, “My brothers, you are well aware that from early days God made his choice among you that through my mouth the Gentiles would hear the word of the gospel and believe. 8 And God, who knows the heart, bore witness by granting them the holy Spirit just as he did us. 9 He made no distinction between us and them, for by faith he purified their hearts. 10 Why, then, are you now putting God to the test by placing on the shoulders of the disciples a yoke that neither our ancestors nor we have been able to bear? 11 On the contrary, we believe that we are saved through the grace of the Lord Jesus, in the same way as they.”[e] 12 The whole assembly fell silent, and they listened while Paul and Barnabas described the signs and wonders God had worked among the Gentiles through them.
James on Dietary Law. 13 [f]After they had fallen silent, James responded, “My brothers, listen to me. 14 Symeon[g] has described how God first concerned himself with acquiring from among the Gentiles a people for his name. 15 The words of the prophets agree with this, as is written:

    16: 
‘After this I shall return
    and rebuild the fallen hut of David;
from its ruins I shall rebuild it
    and raise it up again,

    17: 
so that the rest of humanity may seek out the Lord,
    even all the Gentiles on whom my name is invoked.
Thus says the Lord who accomplishes these things,

    18: 
    known from of old.’

    19: It is my judgment, therefore, that we ought to stop troubling the Gentiles who turn to God, 
    20: but tell them by letter to avoid pollution from idols, unlawful marriage, the meat of strangled animals, and blood. 
    21: For Moses, for generations now, has had those who proclaim him in every town, as he has been read in the synagogues every sabbath.”
Letter of the Apostles. 
    22: Then the apostles and presbyters, in agreement with the whole church, decided to choose representatives and to send them to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas. The ones chosen were Judas, who was called Barsabbas, and Silas, leaders among the brothers. 
    23: This is the letter delivered by them: “The apostles and the presbyters, your brothers, to the brothers in Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia of Gentile origin: greetings. 
    24: Since we have heard that some of our number  without any mandate from us have upset you with their teachings and disturbed your peace of mind, 
    25: we have with one accord decided to choose representatives and to send them to you along with our beloved Barnabas and Paul, 
    26: who have dedicated their lives to the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
    27: So we are sending Judas and Silas who will also convey this same message by word of mouth: 
    28: ‘It is the decision of the holy Spirit and of us not to place on you any burden beyond these necessities, 
    29: namely, to abstain from meat sacrificed to idols, from blood, from meats of strangled animals, and from unlawful marriage. If you keep free of these, you will be doing what is right. Farewell.’”
Delegates at Antioch. 
    30: And so they were sent on their journey. Upon their arrival in Antioch they called the assembly together and delivered the letter. 
    31: When the people read it, they were delighted with the exhortation. 
    32: Judas and Silas, who were themselves prophets, exhorted and strengthened the brothers with many words. 
    33: After they had spent some time there, they were sent off with greetings of peace from the brothers to those who had commissioned them. 
    34: ][h] 
    35: But Paul and Barnabas remained in Antioch, teaching and proclaiming with many others the word of the Lord.
V. The Mission of Paul to the Ends of the Earth
Paul and Barnabas Separate. 
    36: After some time, Paul said to Barnabas, “Come, let us make a return visit to see how the brothers are getting on in all the cities where we proclaimed the word of the Lord.” 
    37: Barnabas wanted to take with them also John, who was called Mark, 
    38: but Paul insisted that they should not take with them someone who had deserted them at Pamphylia and who had not continued with them in their work. 
    39: So sharp was their disagreement that they separated. Barnabas took Mark and sailed to Cyprus. 
    40: But Paul chose Silas and departed after being commended by the brothers to the grace of the Lord. 
    41: He traveled through Syria and Cilicia bringing strength to the churches.


  Chapter 16.

    1: 
Paul in Lycaonia: Timothy. 1 He reached  Derbe and Lystra where there was a disciple named Timothy, the son of a Jewish woman who was a believer, but his father was a Greek. 
    2: The brothers in Lystra and Iconium spoke highly of him, 
    3: and Paul wanted him to come along with him. On account of the Jews of that region, Paul had him circumcised, for they all knew that his father was a Greek. 
    4: As they traveled from city to city, they handed on to the people for observance the decisions reached by the apostles and presbyters in Jerusalem. 
    5: 
    6: Paul in Lycaonia: Timothy. 1 He reached  Derbe and Lystra where there was a disciple named Timothy, the son of a Jewish woman who was a believer, but his father was a Greek. 2 The brothers in Lystra and Iconium spoke highly of him, 3 and Paul wanted him to come along with him. On account of the Jews of that region, Paul had him circumcised,[a] for they all knew that his father was a Greek. 4 As they traveled from city to city, they handed on to the people for observance the decisions reached by the apostles and presbyters in Jerusalem. 5 Day after day the churches grew stronger in faith and increased in number.
Through Asia Minor. 6 They traveled through the Phrygian and Galatian territory because they had been prevented by the holy Spirit from preaching the message in the province of Asia. 
    7: When they came to Mysia, they tried to go on into Bithynia, but the Spirit of Jesus did not allow them, 
    8: so they crossed through Mysia and came down to Troas. 
    9: uring  night Paul had a vision. A Macedonian stood before him and implored him with these words, “Come over to Macedonia and help us.” 
    10: When he had seen the vision, we sought passage to Macedonia at once, concluding that God had called us to proclaim the good news to them.
Into Europe. 
    11: We set sail from Troas, making a straight run for Samothrace, and on the next day to Neapolis, 
    12: and from there to Philippi, a leading city in that district of Macedonia and a Roman colony. We spent some time in that city. 
    13: On the sabbath we went outside the city gate along the river where we thought there would be a place of prayer. We sat and spoke with the women who had gathered there. 
    14: One of them, a woman named Lydia, a dealer in purple cloth, from the city of Thyatira, a worshiper of God, listened, and the Lord opened her heart to pay attention to what Paul was saying. 
    15: 
    16: Paul in Lycaonia: Timothy. 1 He reached  Derbe and Lystra where there was a disciple named Timothy, the son of a Jewish woman who was a believer, but his father was a Greek. 2 The brothers in Lystra and Iconium spoke highly of him, 3 and Paul wanted him to come along with him. On account of the Jews of that region, Paul had him circumcised,[a] for they all knew that his father was a Greek. 4 As they traveled from city to city, they handed on to the people for observance the decisions reached by the apostles and presbyters in Jerusalem. 5 Day after day the churches grew stronger in faith and increased in number.
Through Asia Minor. 6 They traveled through the Phrygian and Galatian territory because they had been prevented by the holy Spirit from preaching the message in the province of Asia. 7 When they came to Mysia, they tried to go on into Bithynia, but the Spirit of Jesus[b] did not allow them, 8 so they crossed through Mysia and came down to Troas. 9 During [the] night Paul had a vision. A Macedonian stood before him and implored him with these words, “Come over to Macedonia and help us.” 10 When he had seen the vision, we[c] sought passage to Macedonia at once, concluding that God had called us to proclaim the good news to them.
Into Europe. 11 [d]We set sail from Troas, making a straight run for Samothrace, and on the next day to Neapolis, 12 and from there to Philippi, a leading city in that district of Macedonia and a Roman colony. We spent some time in that city. 13 On the sabbath we went outside the city gate along the river where we thought there would be a place of prayer. We sat and spoke with the women who had gathered there. 14 One of them, a woman named Lydia, a dealer in purple cloth, from the city of Thyatira, a worshiper of God,[e] listened, and the Lord opened her heart to pay attention to what Paul was saying. 15 After she and her household had been baptized, she offered us an invitation, “If you consider me a believer in the Lord, come and stay at my home,” and she prevailed on us.
Imprisonment at Philippi. 16 As we were going to the place of prayer, we met a slave girl with an oracular spirit,[f] who used to bring a large profit to her owners through her fortune-telling. 
    17: She began to follow Paul and us, shouting, “These people are slaves of the Most High God, who proclaim to you a way of salvation.” 
    18: She did this for many days. Paul became annoyed, turned, and said to the spirit, “I command you in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her.” Then it came out at that moment.

    19: When her owners saw that their hope of profit was gone, they seized Paul and Silas and dragged them to the public square before the local authorities. 
    20: They brought them before the magistrates and said, “These people are Jews and are disturbing our city 
    21: and are advocating customs that are not lawful for us Romans to adopt or practice.” 
    22: The crowd joined in the attack on them, and the magistrates had them stripped and ordered them to be beaten with rods. 
    23: After inflicting many blows on them, they threw them into prison and instructed the jailer to guard them securely. 
    24: When he received these instructions, he put them in the innermost cell and secured their feet to a stake.
Deliverance from Prison. 
    25: About midnight, while Paul and Silas were praying and singing hymns to God as the prisoners listened, 
    26: there was suddenly such a severe earthquake that the foundations of the jail shook; all the doors flew open, and the chains of all were pulled loose. 
    27: When the jailer woke up and saw the prison doors wide open, he drew  sword and was about to kill himself, thinking that the prisoners had escaped. 
    28: But Paul shouted out in a loud voice, “Do no harm to yourself; we are all here.” 
    29: He asked for a light and rushed in and, trembling with fear, he fell down before Paul and Silas. 
    30: Then he brought them out and said, “Sirs, what must I do to be saved?” 
    31: And they said, “Believe in the Lord Jesus and you and your household will be saved.” 
    32: So they spoke the word of the Lord to him and to everyone in his house. 
    33: He took them in at that hour of the night and bathed their wounds; then he and all his family were baptized at once. 
    34: He brought them up into his house and provided a meal and with his household rejoiced at having come to faith in God.

    35: But when it was day, the magistrates sent the lictors with the order, “Release those men.” 
    36: The jailer reported the words to Paul, “The magistrates have sent orders that you be released. Now, then, come out and go in peace.” 
    37: But Paul said to them, “They have beaten us publicly, even though we are Roman citizens and have not been tried, and have thrown us into prison. And now, are they going to release us secretly? By no means. Let them come themselves and lead us out.” 
    38: The lictors reported these words to the magistrates, and they became alarmed when they heard that they were Roman citizens. 
    39: So they came and placated them, and led them out and asked that they leave the city. 
    40: When they had come out of the prison, they went to Lydia’s house where they saw and encouraged the brothers, and then they left.


End of day 309.