Day 293:

Reading Mark, chapters ['13', '14', '15', '16']:

  Chapter 13.

    1: 
The Destruction of the Temple Foretold. 1 As he was making his way out of the temple area one of his disciples said to him, “Look, teacher, what stones and what buildings!” 
    2: 
    3: The Destruction of the Temple Foretold. 1 As he was making his way out of the temple area one of his disciples said to him, “Look, teacher, what stones and what buildings!” 2 Jesus said to him, “Do you see these great buildings? There will not be one stone left upon another that will not be thrown down.”
The Signs of the End. 3 [b]As he was sitting on the Mount of Olives opposite the temple area, Peter, James, John, and Andrew asked him privately, 
    4: “Tell us, when will this happen, and what sign will there be when all these things are about to come to an end?” 
    5: Jesus began to say to them, “See that no one deceives you. 
    6: Many will come in my name saying, ‘I am he,’ and they will deceive many. 
    7: When you hear of wars and reports of wars do not be alarmed; such things must happen, but it will not yet be the end. 
    8: Nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom. There will be earthquakes from place to place and there will be famines. These are the beginnings of the labor pains.
The Coming Persecution. 
    9: Watch out for yourselves. They will hand you over to the courts. You will be beaten in synagogues. You will be arraigned before governors and kings because of me, as a witness before them. 
    10: But the gospel must first be preached to all nations. 
    11: When they lead you away and hand you over, do not worry beforehand about what you are to say. But say whatever will be given to you at that hour. For it will not be you who are speaking but the holy Spirit. 
    12: 
    13: The Destruction of the Temple Foretold. 1 As he was making his way out of the temple area one of his disciples said to him, “Look, teacher, what stones and what buildings!” 2 Jesus said to him, “Do you see these great buildings? There will not be one stone left upon another that will not be thrown down.”
The Signs of the End. 3 [b]As he was sitting on the Mount of Olives opposite the temple area, Peter, James, John, and Andrew asked him privately, 4 “Tell us, when will this happen, and what sign will there be when all these things are about to come to an end?” 5 Jesus began to say to them, “See that no one deceives you. 6 Many will come in my name saying, ‘I am he,’ and they will deceive many. 7 When you hear of wars and reports of wars do not be alarmed; such things must happen, but it will not yet be the end. 8 Nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom. There will be earthquakes from place to place and there will be famines. These are the beginnings of the labor pains.
The Coming Persecution. 9 “Watch out for yourselves. They will hand you over to the courts. You will be beaten in synagogues. You will be arraigned before governors and kings because of me, as a witness before them. 10 But the gospel must first be preached to all nations.[c] 11 When they lead you away and hand you over, do not worry beforehand about what you are to say. But say whatever will be given to you at that hour. For it will not be you who are speaking but the holy Spirit. 12 Brother will hand over brother to death, and the father his child; children will rise up against parents and have them put to death. 13 You will be hated by all because of my name. But the one who perseveres to the end will be saved.
The Great Tribulation. 
    14: “When you see the desolating abomination standing where he should not (let the reader understand), then those in Judea must flee to the mountains, 
    15:  a person on a housetop must not go down or enter to get anything out of his house, 
    16: and a person in a field must not return to get his cloak. 
    17: Woe to pregnant women and nursing mothers in those days. 
    18: Pray that this does not happen in winter. 
    19: For those times will have tribulation such as has not been since the beginning of God’s creation until now, nor ever will be. 
    20: If the Lord had not shortened those days, no one would be saved; but for the sake of the elect whom he chose, he did shorten the days. 
    21: If anyone says to you then, ‘Look, here is the Messiah! Look, there he is!’ do not believe it. 
    22: False messiahs and false prophets will arise and will perform signs and wonders in order to mislead, if that were possible, the elect. 
    23: Be watchful! I have told it all to you beforehand.
The Coming of the Son of Man. 
    24: “But in those days after that tribulation
the sun will be darkened,
    and the moon will not give its light,

    25: 
and the stars will be falling from the sky,
    and the powers in the heavens will be shaken.

    26: And then they will see ‘the Son of Man coming in the clouds’ with great power and glory, 
    27: and then he will send out the angels and gather  elect from the four winds, from the end of the earth to the end of the sky.
The Lesson of the Fig Tree. 
    28: “Learn a lesson from the fig tree. When its branch becomes tender and sprouts leaves, you know that summer is near. 
    29: In the same way, when you see these things happening, know that he is near, at the gates. 
    30: Amen, I say to you, this generation will not pass away until all these things have taken place. 
    31: Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will not pass away.
Need for Watchfulness. 
    32: “But of that day or hour, no one knows, neither the angels in heaven, nor the Son, but only the Father. 
    33: Be watchful! Be alert! You do not know when the time will come. 
    34: It is like a man traveling abroad. He leaves home and places his servants in charge, each with his work, and orders the gatekeeper to be on the watch. 
    35: Watch, therefore; you do not know when the lord of the house is coming, whether in the evening, or at midnight, or at cockcrow, or in the morning. 
    36: May he not come suddenly and find you sleeping. 
    37: What I say to you, I say to all: ‘Watch!’”


  Chapter 14.

    1: 
The Conspiracy Against Jesus. 1 The Passover and the Feast of Unleavened Bread[b] were to take place in two days’ time. So the chief priests and the scribes were seeking a way to arrest him by treachery and put him to death. 
    2: They said, “Not during the festival, for fear that there may be a riot among the people.”
The Anointing at Bethany. 
    3: 
    4: The Conspiracy Against Jesus. 1 The Passover and the Feast of Unleavened Bread[b] were to take place in two days’ time. So the chief priests and the scribes were seeking a way to arrest him by treachery and put him to death. 2 They said, “Not during the festival, for fear that there may be a riot among the people.”
The Anointing at Bethany.[c] 3 When he was in Bethany reclining at table in the house of Simon the leper, a woman came with an alabaster jar of perfumed oil, costly genuine spikenard. She broke the alabaster jar and poured it on his head. 4 There were some who were indignant. “Why has there been this waste of perfumed oil? 
    5: It could have been sold for more than three hundred days’ wages and the money given to the poor.” They were infuriated with her. 
    6: Jesus said, “Let her alone. Why do you make trouble for her? She has done a good thing for me. 
    7: The poor you will always have with you, and whenever you wish you can do good to them, but you will not always have me. 
    8: She has done what she could. She has anticipated anointing my body for burial. 
    9: men, I say to you, wherever the gospel is proclaimed to the whole world, what she has done will be told in memory of her.”
The Betrayal by Judas. 
    10: Then Judas Iscariot, one of the Twelve, went off to the chief priests to hand him over to them. 
    11: When they heard him they were pleased and promised to pay him money. Then he looked for an opportunity to hand him over.
Preparations for the Passover. 
    12: On the first day of the Feast of Unleavened Bread, when they sacrificed the Passover lamb, his disciples said to him, “Where do you want us to go and prepare for you to eat the Passover?” 
    13: 
    14: The Conspiracy Against Jesus. 1 The Passover and the Feast of Unleavened Bread[b] were to take place in two days’ time. So the chief priests and the scribes were seeking a way to arrest him by treachery and put him to death. 2 They said, “Not during the festival, for fear that there may be a riot among the people.”
The Anointing at Bethany.[c] 3 When he was in Bethany reclining at table in the house of Simon the leper, a woman came with an alabaster jar of perfumed oil, costly genuine spikenard. She broke the alabaster jar and poured it on his head. 4 There were some who were indignant. “Why has there been this waste of perfumed oil? 5 It could have been sold for more than three hundred days’ wages and the money given to the poor.” They were infuriated with her. 6 Jesus said, “Let her alone. Why do you make trouble for her? She has done a good thing for me. 7 The poor you will always have with you, and whenever you wish you can do good to them, but you will not always have me. 8 She has done what she could. She has anticipated anointing my body for burial. 9 Amen, I say to you, wherever the gospel is proclaimed to the whole world, what she has done will be told in memory of her.”
The Betrayal by Judas. 10 Then Judas Iscariot, one of the Twelve, went off to the chief priests to hand him over to them. 11 When they heard him they were pleased and promised to pay him money. Then he looked for an opportunity to hand him over.
Preparations for the Passover. 12 On the first day of the Feast of Unleavened Bread, when they sacrificed the Passover lamb,[d] his disciples said to him, “Where do you want us to go and prepare for you to eat the Passover?” 13 He sent two of his disciples and said to them, “Go into the city and a man will meet you, carrying a jar of water.[e] Follow him. 14 Wherever he enters, say to the master of the house, ‘The Teacher says, “Where is my guest room where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?”’ 
    15: Then he will show you a large upper room furnished and ready. Make the preparations for us there.” 
    16: The disciples then went off, entered the city, and found it just as he had told them; and they prepared the Passover.
The Betrayer. 
    17: When it was evening, he came with the Twelve. 
    18: And as they reclined at table and were eating, Jesus said, “Amen, I say to you, one of you will betray me, one who is eating with me.” 
    19: They began to be distressed and to say to him, one by one, “Surely it is not I?” 
    20: He said to them, “One of the Twelve, the one who dips with me into the dish. 
    21: For the Son of Man indeed goes, as it is written of him, but woe to that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed. It would be better for that man if he had never been born.”
The Lord’s Supper. 
    22: While they were eating, he took bread, said the blessing, broke it, and gave it to them, and said, “Take it; this is my body.” 
    23: Then he took a cup, gave thanks, and gave it to them, and they all drank from it. 
    24: He said to them, “This is my blood of the covenant, which will be shed for many. 
    25: Amen, I say to you, I shall not drink again the fruit of the vine until the day when I drink it new in the kingdom of God.” 
    26: Then, after singing a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives.
Peter’s Denial Foretold.[k] 
    27: Then Jesus said to them, “All of you will have your faith shaken, for it is written:
‘I will strike the shepherd,
    and the sheep will be dispersed.’

    28: But after I have been raised up, I shall go before you to Galilee.” 
    29: Peter said to him, “Even though all should have their faith shaken, mine will not be.” 
    30: Then Jesus said to him, “Amen, I say to you, this very night before the cock crows twice you will deny me three times.” 
    31: But he vehemently replied, “Even though I should have to die with you, I will not deny you.” And they all spoke similarly.
The Agony in the Garden. 
    32: Then they came to a place named Gethsemane, and he said to his disciples, “Sit here while I pray.” 
    33: He took with him Peter, James, and John, and began to be troubled and distressed. 
    34: Then he said to them, “My soul is sorrowful even to death. Remain here and keep watch.” 
    35: He advanced a little and fell to the ground and prayed that if it were possible the hour might pass by him; 
    36: he said, “Abba, Father, all things are possible to you. Take this cup away from me, but not what I will but what you will.” 
    37: When he returned he found them asleep. He said to Peter, “Simon, are you asleep? Could you not keep watch for one hour? 
    38: Watch and pray that you may not undergo the test. The spirit is willing but the flesh is weak.” 
    39: Withdrawing again, he prayed, saying the same thing. 
    40: Then he returned once more and found them asleep, for they could not keep their eyes open and did not know what to answer him. 
    41: He returned a third time and said to them, “Are you still sleeping and taking your rest? It is enough. The hour has come. Behold, the Son of Man is to be handed over to sinners. 
    42: Get up, let us go. See, my betrayer is at hand.”
The Betrayal and Arrest of Jesus. 
    43: Then, while he was still speaking, Judas, one of the Twelve, arrived, accompanied by a crowd with swords and clubs who had come from the chief priests, the scribes, and the elders. 
    44: His betrayer had arranged a signal with them, saying, “The man I shall kiss is the one; arrest him and lead him away securely.” 
    45: He came and immediately went over to him and said, “Rabbi.” And he kissed him. 
    46: At this they laid hands on him and arrested him. 
    47: One of the bystanders drew his sword, struck the high priest’s servant, and cut off his ear. 
    48: Jesus said to them in reply, “Have you come out as against a robber, with swords and clubs, to seize me? 
    49: Day after day I was with you teaching in the temple area, yet you did not arrest me; but that the scriptures may be fulfilled.” 
    50: And they all left him and fled. 
    51: Now a young man followed him wearing nothing but a linen cloth about his body. They seized him, 
    52: but he left the cloth behind and ran off naked.
Jesus Before the Sanhedrin. 
    53: They led Jesus away to the high priest, and all the chief priests and the elders and the scribes came together. 
    54: Peter followed him at a distance into the high priest’s courtyard and was seated with the guards, warming himself at the fire. 
    55: The chief priests and the entire Sanhedrin kept trying to obtain testimony against Jesus in order to put him to death, but they found none. 
    56: Many gave false witness against him, but their testimony did not agree. 
    57: Some took the stand and testified falsely against him, alleging, 
    58: “We heard him say, ‘I will destroy this temple made with hands and within three days I will build another not made with hands.’” 
    59: Even so their testimony did not agree. 
    60: The high priest rose before the assembly and questioned Jesus, saying, “Have you no answer? What are these men testifying against you?” 
    61: But he was silent and answered nothing. Again the high priest asked him and said to him, “Are you the Messiah, the son of the Blessed One?” 
    62: Then Jesus answered, “I am;
and ‘you will see the Son of Man
    seated at the right hand of the Power
    and coming with the clouds of heaven.’”

    63: At that the high priest tore his garments and said, “What further need have we of witnesses? 
    64: You have heard the blasphemy. What do you think?” They all condemned him as deserving to die. 
    65: Some began to spit on him. They blindfolded him and struck him and said to him, “Prophesy!” And the guards greeted him with blows.
Peter’s Denial of Jesus. 
    66: While Peter was below in the courtyard, one of the high priest’s maids came along. 
    67: Seeing Peter warming himself, she looked intently at him and said, “You too were with the Nazarene, Jesus.” 
    68: But he denied it saying, “I neither know nor understand what you are talking about.” So he went out into the outer court. [Then the cock crowed.] 
    69: The maid saw him and began again to say to the bystanders, “This man is one of them.” 
    70: Once again he denied it. A little later the bystanders said to Peter once more, “Surely you are one of them; for you too are a Galilean.” 
    71: He began to curse and to swear, “I do not know this man about whom you are talking.” 
    72: And immediately a cock crowed a second time. Then Peter remembered the word that Jesus had said to him, “Before the cock crows twice you will deny me three times.” He broke down and wept.


  Chapter 15.

    1: 
Jesus Before Pilate. 1 As soon as morning came, the chief priests with the elders and the scribes, that is, the whole Sanhedrin, held a council. They bound Jesus, led him away, and handed him over to Pilate. 
    2: Pilate questioned him, “Are you the king of the Jews?” He said to him in reply, “You say so.” 
    3: The chief priests accused him of many things. 
    4: 
    5: Jesus Before Pilate. 1 As soon as morning came, the chief priests with the elders and the scribes, that is, the whole Sanhedrin, held a council. They bound Jesus, led him away, and handed him over to Pilate. 2 Pilate questioned him, “Are you the king of the Jews?”[b] He said to him in reply, “You say so.” 3 The chief priests accused him of many things. 4 Again Pilate questioned him, “Have you no answer? See how many things they accuse you of.” 5 Jesus gave him no further answer, so that Pilate was amazed.
The Sentence of Death.[c] 
    6: Now on the occasion of the feast he used to release to them one prisoner whom they requested. 
    7: A man called Barabbas was then in prison along with the rebels who had committed murder in a rebellion. 
    8: The crowd came forward and began to ask him to do for them as he was accustomed. 
    9: ilate answered, “Do you want me to release to you the king of the Jews?” 
    10: For he knew that it was out of envy that the chief priests had handed him over. 
    11: But the chief priests stirred up the crowd to have him release Barabbas for them instead. 
    12: Pilate again said to them in reply, “Then what  me to do with [the man you call] the king of the Jews?” 
    13: They shouted again, “Crucify him.” 
    14: 
    15: Jesus Before Pilate. 1 As soon as morning came, the chief priests with the elders and the scribes, that is, the whole Sanhedrin, held a council. They bound Jesus, led him away, and handed him over to Pilate. 2 Pilate questioned him, “Are you the king of the Jews?”[b] He said to him in reply, “You say so.” 3 The chief priests accused him of many things. 4 Again Pilate questioned him, “Have you no answer? See how many things they accuse you of.” 5 Jesus gave him no further answer, so that Pilate was amazed.
The Sentence of Death.[c] 6 Now on the occasion of the feast he used to release to them one prisoner whom they requested. 7 A man called Barabbas[d] was then in prison along with the rebels who had committed murder in a rebellion. 8 The crowd came forward and began to ask him to do for them as he was accustomed. 9 Pilate answered, “Do you want me to release to you the king of the Jews?” 10 For he knew that it was out of envy that the chief priests had handed him over. 11 But the chief priests stirred up the crowd to have him release Barabbas for them instead. 12 Pilate again said to them in reply, “Then what [do you want] me to do with [the man you call] the king of the Jews?” 13 [e]They shouted again, “Crucify him.” 14 Pilate said to them, “Why? What evil has he done?” They only shouted the louder, “Crucify him.” 15 [f]So Pilate, wishing to satisfy the crowd, released Barabbas to them and, after he had Jesus scourged, handed him over to be crucified.
Mockery by the Soldiers. 
    16: The soldiers led him away inside the palace, that is, the praetorium, and assembled the whole cohort. 
    17: They clothed him in purple and, weaving a crown of thorns, placed it on him. 
    18: They began to salute him with, “Hail, King of the Jews!” 
    19: and kept striking his head with a reed and spitting upon him. They knelt before him in homage. 
    20: And when they had mocked him, they stripped him of the purple cloak, dressed him in his own clothes, and led him out to crucify him.
The Way of the Cross. 
    21: They pressed into service a passer-by, Simon, a Cyrenian, who was coming in from the country, the father of Alexander and Rufus, to carry his cross.
The Crucifixion. 
    22: They brought him to the place of Golgotha (which is translated Place of the Skull). 
    23: They gave him wine drugged with myrrh, but he did not take it. 
    24: Then they crucified him and divided his garments by casting lots for them to see what each should take. 
    25: It was nine o’clock in the morning when they crucified him. 
    26: The inscription of the charge against him read, “The King of the Jews.” 
    27: With him they crucified two revolutionaries, one on his right and one on his left. 
    28: ][l] 
    29: Those passing by reviled him, shaking their heads and saying, “Aha! You who would destroy the temple and rebuild it in three days, 
    30: save yourself by coming down from the cross.” 
    31: Likewise the chief priests, with the scribes, mocked him among themselves and said, “He saved others; he cannot save himself. 
    32: Let the Messiah, the King of Israel, come down now from the cross that we may see and believe.” Those who were crucified with him also kept abusing him.
The Death of Jesus. 
    33: At noon darkness came over the whole land until three in the afternoon. 
    34: And at three o’clock Jesus cried out in a loud voice, “Eloi, Eloi, lema sabachthani?” which is translated, “My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?” 
    35: Some of the bystanders who heard it said, “Look, he is calling Elijah.” 
    36: One of them ran, soaked a sponge with wine, put it on a reed, and gave it to him to drink, saying, “Wait, let us see if Elijah comes to take him down.” 
    37: Jesus gave a loud cry and breathed his last. 
    38: The veil of the sanctuary was torn in two from top to bottom. 
    39: When the centurion who stood facing him saw how he breathed his last he said, “Truly this man was the Son of God!” 
    40: There were also women looking on from a distance. Among them were Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of the younger James and of Joses, and Salome. 
    41: These women had followed him when he was in Galilee and ministered to him. There were also many other women who had come up with him to Jerusalem.
The Burial of Jesus. 
    42: When it was already evening, since it was the day of preparation, the day before the sabbath, 
    43: Joseph of Arimathea, a distinguished member of the council, who was himself awaiting the kingdom of God, came and courageously went to Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus. 
    44: Pilate was amazed that he was already dead. He summoned the centurion and asked him if Jesus had already died. 
    45: And when he learned of it from the centurion, he gave the body to Joseph. 
    46: Having bought a linen cloth, he took him down, wrapped him in the linen cloth and laid him in a tomb that had been hewn out of the rock. Then he rolled a stone against the entrance to the tomb. 
    47: Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joses watched where he was laid.


  Chapter 16.

    1: 
The Resurrection of Jesus. 1 When the sabbath was over, Mary Magdalene, Mary, the mother of James, and Salome bought spices so that they might go and anoint him. 
    2: Very early when the sun had risen, on the first day of the week, they came to the tomb. 
    3: They were saying to one another, “Who will roll back the stone for us from the entrance to the tomb?” 
    4: When they looked up, they saw that the stone had been rolled back; it was very large. 
    5: 
    6: The Resurrection of Jesus. 1 When the sabbath was over, Mary Magdalene, Mary, the mother of James, and Salome bought spices so that they might go and anoint him. 2 Very early when the sun had risen, on the first day of the week, they came to the tomb. 3 They were saying to one another, “Who will roll back the stone for us from the entrance to the tomb?” 4 When they looked up, they saw that the stone had been rolled back; it was very large. 5 On entering the tomb they saw a young man sitting on the right side, clothed in a white robe, and they were utterly amazed. 6 He said to them, “Do not be amazed! You seek Jesus of Nazareth, the crucified. He has been raised; he is not here. Behold, the place where they laid him. 
    7: But go and tell his disciples and Peter, ‘He is going before you to Galilee; there you will see him, as he told you.’” 
    8: Then they went out and fled from the tomb, seized with trembling and bewilderment. They said nothing to anyone, for they were afraid.
The Longer Ending
The Appearance to Mary Magdalene. 
    9: hen he had risen, early on the first day of the week, he appeared first to Mary Magdalene, out of whom he had driven seven demons. 
    10: She went and told his companions who were mourning and weeping. 
    11: When they heard that he was alive and had been seen by her, they did not believe.
The Appearance to Two Disciples. 
    12: After this he appeared in another form to two of them walking along on their way to the country. 
    13: They returned and told the others; but they did not believe them either.
The Commissioning of the Eleven. 
    14:  later, as the eleven were at table, he appeared to them and rebuked them for their unbelief and hardness of heart because they had not believed those who saw him after he had been raised. 
    15: 
    16: The Resurrection of Jesus. 1 When the sabbath was over, Mary Magdalene, Mary, the mother of James, and Salome bought spices so that they might go and anoint him. 2 Very early when the sun had risen, on the first day of the week, they came to the tomb. 3 They were saying to one another, “Who will roll back the stone for us from the entrance to the tomb?” 4 When they looked up, they saw that the stone had been rolled back; it was very large. 5 On entering the tomb they saw a young man sitting on the right side, clothed in a white robe, and they were utterly amazed. 6 He said to them, “Do not be amazed! You seek Jesus of Nazareth, the crucified. He has been raised; he is not here. Behold, the place where they laid him. 7 But go and tell his disciples and Peter, ‘He is going before you to Galilee; there you will see him, as he told you.’” 8 Then they went out and fled from the tomb, seized with trembling and bewilderment. They said nothing to anyone, for they were afraid.
The Longer Ending[b]
The Appearance to Mary Magdalene. [9 When he had risen, early on the first day of the week, he appeared first to Mary Magdalene, out of whom he had driven seven demons. 10 She went and told his companions who were mourning and weeping. 11 When they heard that he was alive and had been seen by her, they did not believe.
The Appearance to Two Disciples. 12 After this he appeared in another form to two of them walking along on their way to the country. 13 They returned and told the others; but they did not believe them either.
The Commissioning of the Eleven. 14 [But] later, as the eleven were at table, he appeared to them and rebuked them for their unbelief and hardness of heart because they had not believed those who saw him after he had been raised. 15 He said to them, “Go into the whole world and proclaim the gospel to every creature. 16 Whoever believes and is baptized will be saved; whoever does not believe will be condemned. 
    17: These signs will accompany those who believe: in my name they will drive out demons, they will speak new languages. 
    18: They will pick up serpents , and if they drink any deadly thing, it will not harm them. They will lay hands on the sick, and they will recover.”
The Ascension of Jesus. 
    19: So then the Lord Jesus, after he spoke to them, was taken up into heaven and took his seat at the right hand of God. 
    20: But they went forth and preached everywhere, while the Lord worked with them and confirmed the word through accompanying signs.]
The Shorter Ending
[And they reported all the instructions briefly to Peter’s companions. Afterwards Jesus himself, through them, sent forth from east to west the sacred and imperishable proclamation of eternal salvation. Amen.]


End of day 293.