Day 257:

Reading Ezekiel, chapters ['45', '46', '47', '48']:

  Chapter 45.

    1: When you apportion the land heritage by heritage, you shall set apart a holy portion for the Lord, holier than the rest of the land—twenty-five thousand cubits long and twenty thousand cubits wide; the entire area shall be holy. 
    2: Of this land a square plot, five hundred by five hundred cubits, shall be assigned to the sanctuary, with fifty cubits of free space around it. 
    3: 
    4: 
    5: The Holy Portion. 1 When you apportion the land heritage by heritage, you shall set apart a holy portion for the Lord, holier than the rest of the land—twenty-five thousand cubits long and twenty thousand cubits wide; the entire area shall be holy. 2 Of this land a square plot, five hundred by five hundred cubits, shall be assigned to the sanctuary, with fifty cubits of free space around it. 3 From this tract also measure off a length of twenty-five thousand cubits and a width of ten thousand cubits; on it the sanctuary, the holy of holies, shall stand. 4 This shall be the sacred part of the land belonging to the priests, the ministers of the sanctuary, who draw near to minister to the Lord; it shall be a place for their homes and an area set apart for the sanctuary. 5 There shall also be a strip twenty-five thousand cubits long and ten thousand wide for the Levites, the ministers of the temple, so they have cities to live in. 
    6: You shall assign a strip five thousand cubits wide and twenty-five thousand long as the property of the city parallel to the sacred tract; this shall belong to the whole house of Israel. 
    7: A section shall belong to the prince, bordering both sides of the sacred tract and city combined, extending westward on the west side and eastward on the east side, corresponding in length to one of the tribal portions from the west boundary to the east boundary 
    8: of the land. This shall be his property in Israel so that my princes will no longer oppress my people, but will leave the land to the house of Israel according to its tribes. 
    9: hus says the Lord God: Enough, you princes of Israel! Put away violence and oppression, and do what is just and right! Stop evicting my people!—oracle of the Lord God.
Weights and Measures. 
    10: You shall have honest scales, an honest ephah, and an honest bath. 
    11: The ephah and the bath shall be the same size: the bath equal to one tenth of a homer, and the ephah equal to one tenth of a homer; their capacity is based on the homer. 
    12: The shekel shall be twenty gerahs. Twenty shekels plus twenty-five shekels plus fifteen shekels make up a mina for you.
Offerings. 
    13: This is the offering you must make: one sixth of an ephah from each homer of wheat and one sixth of an ephah from each homer of barley. 
    14: This is the regulation for oil: for every bath of oil, one tenth of a bath, computed by the kor, made up of ten baths, that is, a homer, for ten baths make a homer. 
    15: Also, one sheep from the flock for every two hundred from the pasture land of Israel, for the grain offering, the burnt offering, and communion offerings, to make atonement on their behalf—oracle of the Lord God. 
    16: All the people of the land shall be responsible for these offerings to the prince in Israel. 
    17: It shall be the duty of the prince to provide burnt offerings, grain offerings, and libations on feast days, new moons, and sabbaths, on all the festivals of the house of Israel. He shall provide the purification offering, grain offering, burnt offering, and communion offerings, to make atonement on behalf of the house of Israel.
The Passover. 
    18: Thus says the Lord God: On the first day of the first month you shall take an unblemished young bull to purify the sanctuary. 
    19: The priest shall take some of the blood from the purification offering and smear it on the doorposts of the house, on the four corners of the ledge of the altar, and on the doorposts of the gates of the inner courtyard. 
    20: You shall repeat this on the seventh day of the month for those who have sinned inadvertently or out of ignorance; thus you shall purge the temple. 
    21: On the fourteenth day of the first month you shall observe the feast of Passover; for seven days unleavened bread must be eaten. 
    22: On that day the prince shall sacrifice, on his own behalf and on behalf of all the people of the land, a bull as a purification offering. 
    23: On each of the seven days of the feast he shall sacrifice, as a burnt offering to the Lord, seven bulls and seven rams without blemish, and as a purification offering he shall sacrifice one male goat each day. 
    24: As a grain offering he shall offer one ephah for each bull and one ephah for each ram and one hin of oil for each ephah.
The Feast of Booths. 
    25: In the seventh month, on the fifteenth day of the seventh month, on the feast day and for the next seven days, he shall make the same offerings: the same purification offerings, burnt offerings, grain offerings, and offerings of oil.


  Chapter 46.

    1: Thus says the Lord God: The gate of the inner court facing east shall remain closed throughout the six working days, but on the sabbath and on the day of the new moon it shall be open. 
    2: Then the prince shall enter from outside by way of the vestibule of the gate and remain standing at the doorpost of the gateway while the priests sacrifice his burnt offerings and communion offerings; then he shall bow down in worship at the opening of the gate and leave. But the gate shall not be closed until evening. 
    3: 
    4: 
Sabbaths. 1 Thus says the Lord God: The gate of the inner court facing east shall remain closed throughout the six working days, but on the sabbath and on the day of the new moon it shall be open. 2 Then the prince shall enter from outside by way of the vestibule of the gate and remain standing at the doorpost of the gateway while the priests sacrifice his burnt offerings and communion offerings; then he shall bow down in worship at the opening of the gate and leave. But the gate shall not be closed until evening. 3 The people of the land also shall bow down in worship before the Lord at the opening of this gate on the sabbaths and new moons. 4 The burnt offerings which the prince sacrifices to the Lord on the sabbath shall consist of six unblemished lambs and an unblemished ram, 
    5: 
    6: Sabbaths. 1 Thus says the Lord God: The gate of the inner court facing east shall remain closed throughout the six working days, but on the sabbath and on the day of the new moon it shall be open. 2 Then the prince shall enter from outside by way of the vestibule of the gate and remain standing at the doorpost of the gateway while the priests sacrifice his burnt offerings and communion offerings; then he shall bow down in worship at the opening of the gate and leave. But the gate shall not be closed until evening. 3 The people of the land also shall bow down in worship before the Lord at the opening of this gate on the sabbaths and new moons. 4 The burnt offerings which the prince sacrifices to the Lord on the sabbath shall consist of six unblemished lambs and an unblemished ram, 5 together with a grain offering of one ephah for the ram and whatever he pleases for the lambs, and a hin of oil for each ephah. 6 On the day of the new moon, he shall provide an unblemished young bull, six lambs, and a ram without blemish, 
    7: with a grain offering of one ephah for the bull and an ephah for the ram, and for the lambs whatever he can, and for each ephah a hin of oil.
Ritual Laws. 
    8: When the prince enters, he shall always enter and depart by the vestibule of the gate. 
    9: hen the people of the land come before the Lord to bow down on the festivals, if they enter by the north gate they shall leave by the south gate, and if they enter by the south gate they shall leave by the north gate. They shall not go back by the gate through which they entered; everyone shall leave by the opposite gate. 
    10: When they come in, the prince shall be with them; he shall also leave with them. 
    11: On feasts and festivals, the grain offering shall be an ephah for a bull, an ephah for a ram, but for the lambs whatever they please, and a hin of oil with each ephah. 
    12: When the prince makes a freewill offering to the Lord, whether a burnt offering or communion offering, the gate facing east shall be opened for him, and he shall bring his burnt offering or peace offering as he does on the sabbath. Then he shall leave, and the gate shall be closed after his departure. 
    13: Every day you shall bring as a burnt offering to the Lord an unblemished year-old lamb; you shall offer it every morning, 
    14: and with it every morning a grain offering of one sixth of an ephah, with a third of a hin of oil to moisten the fine flour. This grain offering for the Lord is a perpetual statute. 
    15: The lamb, the grain offering, and the oil you must bring every morning as a perpetual burnt offering.
The Prince and the Land. 
    16: Thus says the Lord God: If the prince makes a gift of part of his heritage to any of his sons, it belongs to his sons; that property is their heritage. 
    17: But if he makes a gift of part of his heritage to one of his servants, it belongs to him until the year of release; then it reverts to the prince. Only the heritage given to his sons belongs to him. 
    18: The prince shall not seize any part of the heritage of the people by forcing them off their property. From his own property he shall provide heritage for his sons, so that none of my people will be driven off their property.
The Temple Kitchens. 
    19: Then he brought me through the entrance at the side of the gateway to the chambers reserved for the priests, which faced north. There I saw a place at the far west end, 
    20: about which he said to me, “This is the place where the priests cook the reparation offerings and the purification offerings and bake the grain offerings, so they do not have to bring them into the outer court and so transmit holiness to the people.” 
    21: Then he led me into the outer court and had me cross to the four corners of the court, and there, in each corner, was another court! 
    22: In all four corners of the courtyard there were courts set off, each forty cubits long by thirty cubits wide, all four of them the same size. 
    23: A stone wall surrounded them on four sides, and ovens were built along the bottom of the walls all the way around. 
    24: He said to me, “These are the kitchens where the temple ministers cook the sacrifices of the people.”


  Chapter 47.

    1: Then he brought me back to the entrance of the temple, and there! I saw water flowing out from under the threshold of the temple toward the east, for the front of the temple faced east. The water flowed out toward the right side of the temple to the south of the altar. 
    2: He brought me by way of the north gate and around the outside to the outer gate facing east; there I saw water trickling from the southern side. 
    3: 
    4: 
The Wonderful Stream. 1 Then he brought me back to the entrance of the temple, and there! I saw water flowing out from under the threshold of the temple toward the east, for the front of the temple faced east. The water flowed out toward the right side of the temple to the south of the altar. 2 He brought me by way of the north gate and around the outside to the outer gate facing east; there I saw water trickling from the southern side. 3 When he continued eastward with a measuring cord in his hand, he measured off a thousand cubits and had me wade through the water; it was ankle-deep. 4 He measured off another thousand cubits and once more had me wade through the water; it was up to the knees. He measured another thousand cubits and had me wade through the water; it was up to my waist. 
    5: Once more he measured off a thousand cubits. Now it was a river I could not wade across. The water had risen so high, I would have to swim—a river that was impassable. 
    6: 
    7: The Wonderful Stream. 1 Then he brought me back to the entrance of the temple, and there! I saw water flowing out from under the threshold of the temple toward the east, for the front of the temple faced east. The water flowed out toward the right side of the temple to the south of the altar. 2 He brought me by way of the north gate and around the outside to the outer gate facing east; there I saw water trickling from the southern side. 3 When he continued eastward with a measuring cord in his hand, he measured off a thousand cubits and had me wade through the water; it was ankle-deep. 4 He measured off another thousand cubits and once more had me wade through the water; it was up to the knees. He measured another thousand cubits and had me wade through the water; it was up to my waist. 5 Once more he measured off a thousand cubits. Now it was a river I could not wade across. The water had risen so high, I would have to swim—a river that was impassable. 6 Then he asked me, “Do you see this, son of man?” He brought me to the bank of the river and had me sit down. 7 As I was returning, I saw along the bank of the river a great many trees on each side. 
    8: He said to me, “This water flows out into the eastern district, runs down into the Arabah and empties into the polluted waters of the sea to freshen them. 
    9: herever it flows, the river teems with every kind of living creature; fish will abound. Where these waters flow they refresh; everything lives where the river goes. 
    10: Fishermen will stand along its shore from En-gedi to En-eglaim; it will become a place for drying nets, and it will abound with as many kinds of fish as the Great Sea. 
    11: Its marshes and swamps shall not be made fresh, but will be left for salt. 
    12: Along each bank of the river every kind of fruit tree will grow; their leaves will not wither, nor will their fruit fail. Every month they will bear fresh fruit because the waters of the river flow out from the sanctuary. Their fruit is used for food, and their leaves for healing.”
The New Israel
Boundaries of the Land. 
    13: Thus says the Lord God: These are the boundaries of the land which you shall apportion among the twelve tribes of Israel, with Joseph having two portions. 
    14: You shall apportion it equally because I swore to give it to your ancestors as a heritage; this land, then, is your heritage. 
    15: These are the borders of the land: on the northern side, from the Great Sea in the direction of Hethlon, Lebo-hamath to Zedad, 
    16: Berothah, and Sibraim, along the frontiers of Damascus and Hamath, to Hazar-enon, on the border of Hauran. 
    17: Thus the border extends from the sea to Hazar-enon, north of the border of Damascus, the frontier of Hamath to the north. This is the northern boundary. 
    18: The eastern border shall be between Damascus and Hauran, while the Jordan will form the border between Gilead and the land of Israel down to the eastern sea as far as Tamar. This is the eastern boundary. 
    19: The southern border shall go southward from Tamar to the waters of Meribath-kadesh, on to the Wadi of Egypt, and into the Great Sea. This is the southern boundary. 
    20: The western border shall have the Great Sea as a boundary as far as a point opposite Lebo-hamath. This is the western boundary.
The Northern Portions. 
    21: You shall divide this land according to the tribes of Israel. 
    22: You shall allot it as heritage for yourselves and for the resident aliens in your midst who have fathered children among you. You shall treat them like native Israelites; along with you they shall receive a heritage among the tribes of Israel. 
    23: In whatever tribe the resident alien lives, there you shall assign his heritage—oracle of the Lord God.


  Chapter 48.

    1: These are the names of the tribes:
At the northern end, along the side of the way to Hethlon, Lebo-hamath, and Hazar-enon, the border of Damascus, and northward up to the frontier with Hamath, from the eastern border to the western: Dan, one portion. 
    2: Along the territory of Dan from the eastern border to the western border: Asher, one portion. 
    3: 
    4: 
1 These are the names of the tribes:
At the northern end, along the side of the way to Hethlon, Lebo-hamath, and Hazar-enon, the border of Damascus, and northward up to the frontier with Hamath, from the eastern border to the western: Dan, one portion. 2 Along the territory of Dan from the eastern border to the western border: Asher, one portion. 3 Along the territory of Asher from the eastern border to the western border: Naphtali, one portion. 4 Along the territory of Naphtali from the eastern border to the western border: Manasseh, one portion. 
    5: Along the territory of Manasseh from the eastern border to the western border: Ephraim, one portion. 
    6: Along the territory of Ephraim from the eastern border to the western border: Reuben, one portion. 
    7: 
    8: 1 These are the names of the tribes:
At the northern end, along the side of the way to Hethlon, Lebo-hamath, and Hazar-enon, the border of Damascus, and northward up to the frontier with Hamath, from the eastern border to the western: Dan, one portion. 2 Along the territory of Dan from the eastern border to the western border: Asher, one portion. 3 Along the territory of Asher from the eastern border to the western border: Naphtali, one portion. 4 Along the territory of Naphtali from the eastern border to the western border: Manasseh, one portion. 5 Along the territory of Manasseh from the eastern border to the western border: Ephraim, one portion. 6 Along the territory of Ephraim from the eastern border to the western border: Reuben, one portion. 7 Along the territory of Reuben from the eastern border to the western border: Judah, one portion.
The Sacred Tract. 8 Along the territory of Judah from the eastern border to the western border is the tract you shall set apart, twenty-five thousand cubits wide and as long as one of the portions from the eastern border to the western border. The sanctuary shall stand in the center of the tract. 
    9: he tract you set apart for the Lord shall be twenty-five thousand cubits long by twenty thousand wide. 
    10: The sacred tract will be given to the following: the priests shall have twenty-five thousand cubits on the north, ten thousand on the west, ten thousand on the east, and twenty-five thousand on the south. The sanctuary of the Lord shall be in its center. 
    11: The consecrated priests, the Zadokites, who fulfilled my service and did not stray with the Israelites as the Levites did, 
    12: shall have their own tract set apart, next to the territory of the Levites, separate from the most holy tract. 
    13: The Levites shall have territory corresponding to that of the priests, twenty-five thousand cubits long and ten thousand cubits wide. The whole tract shall be twenty-five thousand cubits long and twenty thousand wide. 
    14: They may not sell or exchange or transfer any of it, the best part of the land, for it is sacred to the Lord. 
    15: The remaining section, five thousand cubits long and twenty-five thousand cubits wide, is profane land, assigned to the city for dwellings and pasture. The city is at its center. 
    16: These are the dimensions of the city: the north side, forty-five hundred cubits; the south side, forty-five hundred cubits; the east side, forty-five hundred cubits; and the west side, forty-five hundred cubits. 
    17: The pasture land for the city extends north two hundred fifty cubits, south two hundred fifty cubits, east two hundred fifty cubits, and west two hundred fifty cubits. 
    18: The remaining section runs eastward along the sacred tract for ten thousand cubits and westward ten thousand cubits. Its produce shall provide food for the workers of the city. 
    19: The workers of the city, from all the tribes of Israel, shall cultivate it. 
    20: The entire sacred tract measures twenty-five thousand by twenty-five thousand cubits; as a square you shall set apart the sacred tract together with the city property.

    21: The remaining land on both sides of the sacred tract and the property of the city shall belong to the prince, extending eastward twenty-five thousand cubits up to the eastern boundary, and westward twenty-five thousand cubits to the western boundary. This portion belongs to the prince and corresponds to the tribal portions. The sacred tract and the sanctuary of the temple shall be in the middle. 
    22: Except for the Levites’ property and the city’s property, which are in the middle of the prince’s property, the territory between the portion of Judah and the portion of Benjamin shall belong to the prince.
The Southern Portions. 
    23: These are the remaining tribes:
From the eastern border to the western border: Benjamin, one portion. 
    24: Along the territory of Benjamin from the eastern border to the western border: Simeon, one portion. 
    25: Along the territory of Simeon from the eastern border to the western border: Issachar, one portion. 
    26: Along the territory of Issachar from the eastern border to the western border: Zebulun, one portion. 
    27: Along the territory of Zebulun from the eastern border to the western border: Gad, one portion. 
    28: Along the territory of Gad shall be the southern border. This boundary shall extend from Tamar to the waters of Meribath-kadesh, and along the Wadi of Egypt to the Great Sea. 
    29: This is the land you shall apportion as a heritage among the tribes of Israel, and these are their portions—oracle of the Lord God.
The Gates of the City. 
    30: These are the exits from the city: On the north side, measuring forty-five hundred cubits— 
    31: the gates are named after the tribes of Israel—on the north, three gates: the gate of Reuben, one; the gate of Judah, one; and the gate of Levi, one. 
    32: On the east side, measuring forty-five hundred cubits, three gates: the gate of Joseph, one; the gate of Benjamin, one; and the gate of Dan, one. 
    33: On the south side, measuring forty-five hundred cubits, three gates: the gate of Simeon, one; the gate of Issachar, one; and the gate of Zebulun, one. 
    34: On the west side, measuring forty-five hundred cubits, three gates: the gate of Gad, one; the gate of Asher, one; and the gate of Naphtali, one. 
    35: The circuit of the city shall be eighteen thousand cubits. From now on the name of the city is “The Lord is there.”


End of day 257.