Day 235:

Reading Jeremiah, chapters ['25', '26', '27', '28']:

  Chapter 25.

    1: 
    2: 
Seventy Years of Exile. 1 The word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the people of Judah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim, son of Josiah, king of Judah (the first year of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon). 2 This word the prophet Jeremiah spoke to all the people of Judah and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem: 
    3: Since the thirteenth year of Josiah, son of Amon, king of Judah, to this day—that is, twenty-three years—the word of the Lord has come to me and I spoke to you untiringly, but you would not listen. 
    4: 
    5: Seventy Years of Exile. 1 The word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the people of Judah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim, son of Josiah, king of Judah (the first year of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon). 2 This word the prophet Jeremiah spoke to all the people of Judah and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem: 3 Since the thirteenth year of Josiah, son of Amon, king of Judah, to this day—that is, twenty-three years—the word of the Lord has come to me and I spoke to you untiringly, but you would not listen. 4 The Lord kept sending you all his servants the prophets, but you refused to listen or pay attention 5 to this message: Turn back, each of you, from your evil way and from your evil deeds; then you shall remain in the land which the Lord gave you and your ancestors, from of old and forever. 
    6: Do not follow other gods to serve and bow down to them; do not provoke me with the works of your hands, or I will bring evil upon you. 
    7: But you would not listen to me—oracle of the Lord—and so you provoked me with the works of your hands to your own harm. 
    8: Hence, thus says the Lord of hosts: Since you would not listen to my words, 
    9:  am about to send for and fetch all the tribes from the north—oracle of the Lord—and I will send for Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, my servant; I will bring them against this land, its inhabitants, and all these neighboring nations. I will doom them, making them an object of horror, of hissing, of everlasting reproach. 
    10: Among them I will put to an end the song of joy and the song of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, the sound of the millstone and the light of the lamp. 
    11: This whole land shall be a ruin and a waste. Seventy years these nations shall serve the king of Babylon; 
    12: but when the seventy years have elapsed, I will punish the king of Babylon and that nation and the land of the Chaldeans for their guilt—oracle of the Lord. Their land I will turn into everlasting waste. 
    13: Against that land I will fulfill all the words I have spoken against it, all that is written in this book, which Jeremiah prophesied against all the nations. 
    14: They also shall serve many nations and great kings, and thus I will repay them according to their own deeds and according to the works of their hands.
The Cup of Judgment on the Nations. 
    15: For thus said the Lord, the God of Israel, to me: Take this cup of the wine of wrath[c] from my hand and have all the nations to whom I will send you drink it. 
    16: They shall drink, and retch, and go mad, because of the sword I will send among them. 
    17: I took the cup from the hand of the Lord and gave it as drink to all the nations to whom the Lord sent me: 
    18: to Jerusalem, the cities of Judah, its kings and princes, to make them a ruin and a waste, an object of hissing and cursing, as they are today; 
    19: to Pharaoh, king of Egypt, and his servants, princes, all his people 
    20: and those of mixed ancestry; all the kings of the land of Uz; all the kings of the land of the Philistines: Ashkelon, Gaza, Ekron, and the remnant of Ashdod; 
    21: Edom, Moab, and the Ammonites; 
    22: all the kings of Tyre, of Sidon, and of the shores beyond the sea; 
    23: Dedan and Tema and Buz, all the desert dwellers who shave their temples; 
    24: 
    25: Seventy Years of Exile. 1 The word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the people of Judah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim, son of Josiah, king of Judah (the first year of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon). 2 This word the prophet Jeremiah spoke to all the people of Judah and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem: 3 Since the thirteenth year of Josiah, son of Amon, king of Judah, to this day—that is, twenty-three years—the word of the Lord has come to me and I spoke to you untiringly, but you would not listen. 4 The Lord kept sending you all his servants the prophets, but you refused to listen or pay attention 5 to this message: Turn back, each of you, from your evil way and from your evil deeds; then you shall remain in the land which the Lord gave you and your ancestors, from of old and forever. 6 Do not follow other gods to serve and bow down to them; do not provoke me with the works of your hands, or I will bring evil upon you. 7 But you would not listen to me—oracle of the Lord—and so you provoked me with the works of your hands to your own harm. 8 Hence, thus says the Lord of hosts: Since you would not listen to my words, 9 I am about to send for and fetch all the tribes from the north—oracle of the Lord—and I will send for Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, my servant; I will bring them against this land, its inhabitants, and all these neighboring nations. I will doom them, making them an object of horror, of hissing, of everlasting reproach. 10 Among them I will put to an end the song of joy and the song of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, the sound of the millstone and the light of the lamp. 11 This whole land shall be a ruin and a waste. Seventy years these nations shall serve the king of Babylon; 12 but when the seventy years have elapsed, I will punish the king of Babylon and that nation and the land of the Chaldeans for their guilt—oracle of the Lord. Their land I will turn into everlasting waste. 13 Against that land I will fulfill all the words I have spoken against it, all that is written in this book, which Jeremiah prophesied against all the nations. 14 They also shall serve many nations and great kings, and thus I will repay them according to their own deeds and according to the works of their hands.
The Cup of Judgment on the Nations. 15 [b]For thus said the Lord, the God of Israel, to me: Take this cup of the wine of wrath[c] from my hand and have all the nations to whom I will send you drink it. 16 They shall drink, and retch, and go mad, because of the sword I will send among them. 17 I took the cup from the hand of the Lord and gave it as drink to all the nations to whom the Lord sent me: 18 to Jerusalem, the cities of Judah, its kings and princes, to make them a ruin and a waste, an object of hissing and cursing, as they are today; 19 to Pharaoh, king of Egypt, and his servants, princes, all his people 20 and those of mixed ancestry; all the kings of the land of Uz;[d] all the kings of the land of the Philistines: Ashkelon, Gaza, Ekron, and the remnant of Ashdod; 21 Edom, Moab, and the Ammonites; 22 all the kings of Tyre, of Sidon, and of the shores beyond the sea;[e] 23 Dedan and Tema and Buz,[f] all the desert dwellers who shave their temples; 24 all the kings of Arabia; 25 all the kings of Zimri, of Elam, of the Medes; 
    26: all the kings of the north, near and far, one after the other; all the kingdoms upon the face of the earth and after them the king of Sheshach shall drink.

    27: Tell them: Thus says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel: Drink! Get drunk and vomit! Fall, never to rise, before the sword that I will send among you! 
    28: If they refuse to take the cup from your hand and drink, say to them: Thus says the Lord of hosts: You must drink! 
    29: Now that I am inflicting evil on this city, called by my name, how can you possibly escape? You shall not escape! I am calling down the sword upon all the inhabitants of the earth—oracle of the Lord of hosts. 
    30: As for you, prophesy against them all these words and say to them:
The Lord roars from on high,
    from his holy dwelling he raises his voice;
Mightily he roars over his sheepfold,
    a shout like that of vintagers echoes
    over all the inhabitants of the earth.

    31: 
The uproar spreads
    to the end of the earth;
For the Lord has an indictment against the nations,
    he enters into judgment against all flesh:
The wicked shall be given to the sword—
    oracle of the Lord.

    32: 
    Thus says the Lord of hosts:
Look! disaster stalks
    nation after nation;
A violent storm surges
    from the recesses of the earth.

    33: On that day, those whom the Lord has slain will be strewn from one end of the earth to the other. They will not be mourned, they will not be gathered, they will not be buried; they shall lie like dung upon the ground.

    34: 
Howl, you shepherds, and wail!
    roll on the ground, leaders of the flock!
The time for your slaughter has come;
    like choice rams you shall fall.

    35: 
There is no flight for the shepherds,
    no escape for the leaders of the flock.

    36: 
Listen! Wailing from the shepherds,
    howling from the leaders of the flock!
For the Lord lays waste their grazing place;

    37: 
    desolate are the peaceful pastures,
    from the burning wrath of the Lord.

    38: 
Like a lion he leaves his lair,
    and their land is made desolate
By the sweeping sword,
    and the burning wrath of the Lord.


  Chapter 26.

    1: 
    2: 
Jeremiah Threatened with Death. 1 In the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim, son of Josiah, king of Judah, this word came from the Lord: 2 Thus says the Lord: Stand in the court of the house of the Lord and speak to the inhabitants of all the cities of Judah who come to worship in the house of the Lord; whatever I command you, tell them, and hold nothing back. 
    3: Perhaps they will listen and turn, all of them from their evil way, so that I may repent of the evil I plan to inflict upon them for their evil deeds. 
    4: Say to them: Thus says the Lord: If you do not obey me, by walking according to the law I set before you 
    5: 
    6: Jeremiah Threatened with Death. 1 In the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim, son of Josiah, king of Judah, this word came from the Lord: 2 Thus says the Lord: Stand in the court of the house of the Lord and speak to the inhabitants of all the cities of Judah who come to worship in the house of the Lord; whatever I command you, tell them, and hold nothing back. 3 Perhaps they will listen and turn, all of them from their evil way, so that I may repent of the evil I plan to inflict upon them for their evil deeds. 4 Say to them: Thus says the Lord: If you do not obey me, by walking according to the law I set before you 5 and listening to the words of my servants the prophets, whom I kept sending you, even though you do not listen to them, 6 I will treat this house like Shiloh, and make this city a curse for all the nations of the earth.

    7: Now the priests, the prophets, and all the people heard Jeremiah speaking these words in the house of the Lord. 
    8: When Jeremiah finished speaking all that the Lord commanded him to speak to all the people, then the priests, the prophets, and all the people laid hold of him, crying, “You must die! 
    9: hy do you prophesy in the name of the Lord: ‘This house shall become like Shiloh,’ and ‘This city shall be desolate, without inhabitant’?” And all the people crowded around Jeremiah in the house of the Lord.

    10: When the princes of Judah heard about these things, they came up from the house of the king to the house of the Lord and convened at the New Gate of the house of the Lord. 
    11: The priests and prophets said to the princes and to all the people, “Sentence this man to death! He has prophesied against this city! You heard it with your own ears.” 
    12: Jeremiah said to the princes and all the people: “It was the Lord who sent me to prophesy against this house and city everything you have heard. 
    13: Now, therefore, reform your ways and your deeds; listen to the voice of the Lord your God, so that the Lord will have a change of heart regarding the evil he has spoken against you. 
    14: As for me, I am in your hands; do with me what is good and right in your eyes. 
    15: But you should certainly know that by putting me to death, you bring innocent blood on yourselves, on this city and its inhabitants. For in truth it was the Lord who sent me to you, to speak all these words for you to hear.”

    16: Then the princes and all the people said to the priests and the prophets, “This man does not deserve a death sentence; it is in the name of the Lord, our God, that he speaks to us.” 
    17: At this, some of the elders of the land arose and said to the whole assembly of the people, 
    18: “Micah of Moresheth used to prophesy in the days of Hezekiah, king of Judah, and he said to all the people of Judah: Thus says the Lord of hosts:
Zion shall be plowed as a field,
    Jerusalem, a heap of ruins,
    and the temple mount,
    a forest ridge.

    19: Did Hezekiah, king of Judah, and all Judah condemn him to death? Did he not fear the Lord and entreat the favor of the Lord, so that the Lord had a change of heart regarding the evil he had spoken against them? We, however, are about to do great evil against ourselves.”
The Fate of Uriah. 
    20: There was another man who used to prophesy in the name of the Lord, Uriah, son of Shemaiah, from Kiriath-jearim; he prophesied against this city and this land the same message as Jeremiah. 
    21: When King Jehoiakim and all his officers and princes heard his words, the king sought to have him killed. But Uriah heard of it and fled in fear to Egypt. 
    22: Then King Jehoiakim sent Elnathan, son of Achbor, and others with him into Egypt, 
    23: and they brought Uriah out of Egypt and took him to Jehoiakim the king, who struck him down with the sword and threw his corpse into the common burial ground. 
    24: But the hand of Ahikam, son of Shaphan, protected Jeremiah, so they did not hand him over to the people to be put to death.


  Chapter 27.

    1: 
    2: 
Serve Babylon or Perish. 1 In the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah, son of Josiah, king of Judah, this word came to Jeremiah from the Lord: 2 The Lord said to me: Make for yourself thongs and yoke bars and put them on your shoulders. 
    3: Send them to the kings of Edom, Moab, the Ammonites, Tyre, and Sidon, through the ambassadors who have come to Jerusalem to Zedekiah, king of Judah, 
    4: and command them to tell their lords: Thus says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, Thus shall you say to your lords: 
    5: It was I who made the earth, human being and beast on the face of the earth, by my great power, with my outstretched arm; and I can give them to whomever I think fit. 
    6: 
    7: Serve Babylon or Perish. 1 In the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah, son of Josiah, king of Judah, this word came to Jeremiah from the Lord: 2 The Lord said to me: Make for yourself thongs and yoke bars and put them on your shoulders. 3 Send them to the kings of Edom, Moab, the Ammonites, Tyre, and Sidon, through the ambassadors who have come to Jerusalem to Zedekiah, king of Judah,[c] 4 and command them to tell their lords: Thus says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, Thus shall you say to your lords: 5 It was I who made the earth, human being and beast on the face of the earth, by my great power, with my outstretched arm; and I can give them to whomever I think fit. 6 Now I have given all these lands into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, my servant; even the wild animals I have given him to serve him. 7 All nations shall serve him and his son and his grandson, until the time comes for him and his land; then many nations and great kings will enslave him. 
    8: Meanwhile, the nation or the kingdom that will not serve him, Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, or bend its neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon, I will punish that nation with sword, famine, and pestilence—oracle of the Lord—until I finish them by his hand.

    9: ou, however, must not listen to your prophets, to your diviners and dreamers, to your soothsayers and sorcerers, who say to you, “Do not serve the king of Babylon.” 
    10: For they prophesy lies to you, so as to drive you far from your land, making me banish you so that you perish. 
    11: The people that bends the neck to the yoke of the king of Babylon to serve him, I will leave in peace on its own land—oracle of the Lord—to cultivate it and dwell on it.

    12: To Zedekiah, king of Judah, I spoke the same words: Bend your necks to the yoke of the king of Babylon; serve him and his people, so that you may live. 
    13: Why should you and your people die by sword, famine, and pestilence, in accordance with the word the Lord has spoken to the nation that will not serve the king of Babylon? 
    14: Do not listen to the words of the prophets who say to you, “Do not serve the king of Babylon.” They prophesy lies to you! 
    15: I did not send them—oracle of the Lord—but they prophesy falsely in my name. As a result I must banish you, and you will perish, you and the prophets who are prophesying to you.

    16: To the priests and to all the people I said: Thus says the Lord: Do not listen to the words of your prophets who prophesy to you: “The vessels of the house of the Lord will soon be brought back from Babylon,” for they prophesy lies to you. 
    17: Do not listen to them! Serve the king of Babylon that you may live. Why should this city become rubble? 
    18: If they were prophets, if the word of the Lord were with them, then they would intercede with the Lord of hosts, that the vessels remaining in the house of the Lord and in the house of the king of Judah and in Jerusalem should not also go to Babylon. 
    19: For thus says the Lord of hosts concerning the pillars, the sea, the stands, and the rest of the vessels remaining in this city, 
    20: which Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, did not take when he exiled Jeconiah, son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, from Jerusalem to Babylon, along with all the nobles of Judah and Jerusalem— 
    21: thus says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, concerning the vessels remaining in the house of the Lord, in the house of the king of Judah, and in Jerusalem: 
    22: To Babylon they shall go, and there they shall remain, until the day I look for them—oracle of the Lord; then I will bring them back and restore them to this place.


  Chapter 28.

    1: 
    2: 
The Two Yokes. 1 That same year, in the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah, king of Judah, in the fifth month of the fourth year, Hananiah the prophet, son of Azzur, from Gibeon, said to me in the house of the Lord in the sight of the priests and all the people: 2 “Thus says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel: I have broken the yoke of the king of Babylon. 
    3: Within two years I will restore to this place all the vessels of the house of the Lord which Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, took from this place and carried away to Babylon. 
    4: And Jeconiah, son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, and all the exiles of Judah who went to Babylon, I will bring back to this place—oracle of the Lord—for I will break the yoke of the king of Babylon.”

    5: Jeremiah the prophet answered the prophet Hananiah in the sight of the priests and all the people standing in the house of the Lord, 
    6: and said: Amen! thus may the Lord do! May the Lord fulfill your words that you have prophesied, by bringing back the vessels of the house of the Lord and all the exiles from Babylon to this place! 
    7: 
    8: The Two Yokes. 1 That same year, in the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah, king of Judah, in the fifth month of the fourth year, Hananiah the prophet, son of Azzur, from Gibeon, said to me in the house of the Lord in the sight of the priests and all the people: 2 “Thus says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel: I have broken the yoke of the king of Babylon. 3 Within two years I will restore to this place all the vessels of the house of the Lord which Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, took from this place and carried away to Babylon. 4 And Jeconiah, son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, and all the exiles of Judah who went to Babylon, I will bring back to this place—oracle of the Lord—for I will break the yoke of the king of Babylon.”
5 Jeremiah the prophet answered the prophet Hananiah in the sight of the priests and all the people standing in the house of the Lord, 6 and said: Amen! thus may the Lord do! May the Lord fulfill your words that you have prophesied, by bringing back the vessels of the house of the Lord and all the exiles from Babylon to this place! 7 But now, listen to the word I am about to speak in your hearing and the hearing of all the people. 8 In the past, the prophets who came before you and me prophesied war, disaster, and pestilence against many lands and mighty kingdoms. 
    9: ut the prophet who prophesies peace is recognized as the prophet whom the Lord has truly sent only when his word comes to pass.

    10: Thereupon Hananiah the prophet took the yoke bar from the neck of Jeremiah the prophet and broke it. 
    11: He said in the sight of all the people: “Thus says the Lord: Like this, within two years I will break the yoke of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, from the neck of all the nations.” At that, the prophet Jeremiah went on his way.

    12: After Hananiah the prophet had broken the yoke bar off the neck of the prophet Jeremiah, the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah: 
    13: Go tell Hananiah this: Thus says the Lord: By breaking a wooden yoke bar, you make an iron yoke! 
    14: For thus says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel: A yoke of iron I have placed on the necks of all these nations serving Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, and they shall serve him; even the wild animals I have given him. 
    15: And Jeremiah the prophet said to Hananiah the prophet: Listen to this, Hananiah! The Lord has not sent you, and you have led this people to rely on deception. 
    16: For this, says the Lord, I am sending you from the face of the earth; this very year you shall die, because you have preached rebellion against the Lord. 
    17: Hananiah the prophet died in that year, in the seventh month.
New American Bible (Revised Edition) (NABRE)
Scripture texts, prefaces, introductions, footnotes and cross references used in this work are taken from the New American Bible, revised edition © 2010, 1991, 1986, 1970 Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, DC All Rights Reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the copyright owner.

End of day 235.