Day 90:

Reading 1-Chronicles, chapters ['5', '6', '7', '8']:

  Chapter 5.

    1: The sons of Reuben, the firstborn of Israel. (He was indeed the firstborn, but because he defiled the couch of his father his birthright was given to the sons of Joseph, son of Israel, so that he is not listed in the family records according to his birthright. 
    2: Judah, in fact, became powerful among his brothers, so that the ruler came from him, though the birthright had been Joseph’s.) 
    3: The sons of Reuben, the firstborn of Israel, were Hanoch, Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi. 
    4: 
    5: Reuben. 1 The sons of Reuben, the firstborn of Israel. (He was indeed the firstborn, but because he defiled the couch of his father his birthright was given to the sons of Joseph, son of Israel, so that he is not listed in the family records according to his birthright. 2 Judah, in fact, became powerful among his brothers, so that the ruler came from him, though the birthright had been Joseph’s.) 3 The sons of Reuben, the firstborn of Israel, were Hanoch, Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi. 4 His son was Joel, whose son was Shemaiah, whose son was Gog, whose son was Shimei, 5 whose son was Micah, whose son was Reaiah, whose son was Baal, 
    6: whose son was Beerah, whom Tilgath-pileser, the king of Assyria, took into exile; he was a prince of the Reubenites. 
    7: His brothers who belonged to his clans, when they were listed in the family records according to their descendants, were: Jeiel, the chief, and Zechariah, 
    8: and Bela, son of Azaz, son of Shema, son of Joel. The Reubenites lived in Aroer and as far as Nebo and Baal-meon; 
    9: oward the east they dwelt as far as the wilderness which extends from the Euphrates River, for they had much livestock in the land of Gilead. 
    10: In Saul’s time they waged war with the Hagrites, and when they had defeated them they dwelt in their tents throughout the region east of Gilead.
Gad. 
    11: The Gadites lived alongside them in the land of Bashan as far as Salecah. 
    12: Joel was chief, Shapham was second in command, and Janai was judge in Bashan. 
    13: Their brothers, according to their ancestral houses, were: Michael, Meshullam, Sheba, Jorai, Jacan, Zia, and Eber—seven. 
    14: These were the sons of Abihail, son of Huri, son of Jaroah, son of Gilead, son of Michael, son of Jeshishai, son of Jahdo, son of Buz. 
    15: Ahi, son of Abdiel, son of Guni, was the head of their ancestral houses. 
    16: They dwelt in Gilead, in Bashan and its towns, and in all the pasture lands of Sirion to the borders. 
    17: All were listed in the family records in the time of Jotham, king of Judah, and of Jeroboam, king of Israel.

    18: The Reubenites, Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh were warriors, men who bore shield and sword and who drew the bow, trained in warfare—forty-four thousand seven hundred and sixty men fit for military service. 
    19: When they waged war against the Hagrites and against Jetur, Naphish, and Nodab, 
    20: they received help so that the Hagrites and all who were with them were delivered into their power. For during the battle they cried out to God, and he heard them because they had put their trust in him. 
    21: Along with one hundred thousand persons they also captured their livestock: fifty thousand camels, two hundred fifty thousand sheep, and two thousand donkeys. 
    22: Many were slain and fell; for “From God the victory.” They dwelt in their place until the time of the exile.
The Half-tribe of Manasseh. 
    23: The half-tribe of Manasseh lived in the land of Bashan as far as Baal-hermon, Senir, and Mount Hermon; they were numerous. 
    24: The following were the heads of their ancestral houses: Epher, Ishi, Eliel, Azriel, Jeremiah, Hodaviah, and Jahdiel—men who were warriors, famous men, and heads over their ancestral houses.

    25: However, they acted treacherously toward the God of their ancestors by prostituting themselves to follow the gods of the peoples of the land, whom God had destroyed before them. 
    26: Therefore the God of Israel stirred up against them the anger of Pul, king of Assyria, and the anger of Tilgath-pilneser [sic], king of Assyria, who deported the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh and brought them to Halah, Habor, and Hara, and to the river Gozan, where they have remained to this day.
Levi.[c] 
    27: The sons of Levi were Gershon, Kohath, and Merari. 
    28: The sons of Kohath were Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel. 
    29: The children of Amram were Aaron, Moses, and Miriam. The sons of Aaron were Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar. 
    30: Eleazar became the father of Phinehas. Phinehas became the father of Abishua. 
    31: Abishua became the father of Bukki. Bukki became the father of Uzzi. 
    32: Uzzi became the father of Zerahiah. Zerahiah became the father of Meraioth. 
    33: Meraioth became the father of Amariah. Amariah became the father of Ahitub. 
    34: Ahitub became the father of Zadok. Zadok became the father of Ahimaaz. 
    35: Ahimaaz became the father of Azariah. Azariah became the father of Johanan. 
    36: Johanan became the father of Azariah, who served as priest in the temple Solomon built in Jerusalem. 
    37: Azariah became the father of Amariah. Amariah became the father of Ahitub. 
    38: Ahitub became the father of Zadok. Zadok became the father of Shallum. 
    39: Shallum became the father of Hilkiah. Hilkiah became the father of Azariah. 
    40: Azariah became the father of Seraiah. Seraiah became the father of Jehozadak. 
    41: Jehozadak was one of those who went into the exile which the Lord inflicted on Judah and Jerusalem through Nebuchadnezzar.


  Chapter 6.

    1: The sons of Levi were Gershon, Kohath, and Merari. 
    2: The sons of Gershon were named Libni and Shimei. 
    3: The sons of Kohath were Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel. 
    4: The sons of Merari were Mahli and Mushi.
These were the clans of Levi, according to their ancestors. 
    5: 
    6: 1 The sons of Levi were Gershon, Kohath, and Merari. 2 The sons of Gershon were named Libni and Shimei. 3 The sons of Kohath were Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel. 4 The sons of Merari were Mahli and Mushi.
These were the clans of Levi, according to their ancestors. 5 Of Gershon: his son Libni, whose son was Jahath, whose son was Zimmah, 6 whose son was Joah, whose son was Iddo, whose son was Zerah, whose son was Jetherai.

    7: The sons of Kohath: his son Amminadab, whose son was Korah, whose son was Assir, 
    8: whose son was Elkanah, whose son was Ebiasaph, whose son was Assir, 
    9: hose son was Tahath, whose son was Uriel, whose son was Uzziah, whose son was Shaul. 
    10: The sons of Elkanah were Amasai and Ahimoth, 
    11: whose son was Elkanah, whose son was Zophai, whose son was Nahath, 
    12: whose son was Eliab, whose son was Jeroham, whose son was Elkanah, whose son was Samuel. 
    13: The sons of Samuel were Joel, the firstborn, and Abijah, the second.

    14: The sons of Merari: Mahli, whose son was Libni, whose son was Shimei, whose son was Uzzah, 
    15: whose son was Shimea, whose son was Haggiah, whose son was Asaiah.

    16: The following were established by David for the service of song in the Lord’s house at the time when the ark had a resting place. 
    17: They served as singers before the tabernacle of the tent of meeting until Solomon built the house of the Lord in Jerusalem, and they performed their services according to the order prescribed for them. 
    18: Those who so performed are the following, together with their sons.
Among the Kohathites: Heman, the chanter, son of Joel, son of Samuel, 
    19: son of Elkanah, son of Jeroham, son of Eliel, son of Toah, 
    20: son of Zuph, son of Elkanah, son of Mahath, son of Amasi, 
    21: son of Elkanah, son of Joel, son of Azariah, son of Zephaniah, 
    22: son of Tahath, son of Assir, son of Ebiasaph, son of Korah, 
    23: son of Izhar, son of Kohath, son of Levi, son of Israel.

    24: His brother Asaph stood at his right hand. Asaph was the son of Berechiah, son of Shimea, 
    25: son of Michael, son of Baaseiah, son of Malchijah, 
    26: son of Ethni, son of Zerah, son of Adaiah, 
    27: son of Ethan, son of Zimmah, son of Shimei, 
    28: son of Jahath, son of Gershon, son of Levi.

    29: Their brothers, the Merarites, stood at the left: Ethan, son of Kishi, son of Abdi, son of Malluch, 
    30: son of Hashabiah, son of Amaziah, son of Hilkiah, 
    31: son of Amzi, son of Bani, son of Shemer, 
    32: son of Mahli, son of Mushi, son of Merari, son of Levi.

    33: Their brother Levites were appointed to all the other services of the tabernacle of the house of God. 
    34: However, it was Aaron and his sons who made the sacrifice on the altar for burnt offerings and on the altar of incense; they alone had charge of the holy of holies and of making atonement for Israel, as Moses, the servant of God, had commanded.

    35: These were the sons of Aaron: his son Eleazar, whose son was Phinehas, whose son was Abishua, 
    36: whose son was Bukki, whose son was Uzzi, whose son was Zerahiah, 
    37: whose son was Meraioth, whose son was Amariah, whose son was Ahitub, 
    38: whose son was Zadok, whose son was Ahimaaz.

    39: The following were their dwelling places, by encampments in their territories. To the sons of Aaron who belonged to the clan of the Kohathites, since the lot fell to them, 
    40: was assigned Hebron in the land of Judah, with its adjacent pasture lands. 
    41: However, the open country and the villages belonging to the city had been given to Caleb, the son of Jephunneh. 
    42: There were assigned to the sons of Aaron: Hebron a city of refuge, Libnah with its pasture lands, Jattir with its pasture lands, Eshtemoa with its pasture lands, 
    43: Holon with its pasture lands, Debir with its pasture lands, 
    44: Ashan with its pasture lands, Jetta with its pasture lands, and Beth-shemesh with its pasture lands. 
    45: Also from the tribe of Benjamin: Gibeon with its pasture lands, Geba with its pasture lands, Almon with its pasture lands, Anathoth with its pasture lands. In all, they had thirteen cities with their pasture lands. 49 The Israelites assigned these cities with their pasture lands to the Levites, 50 designating them by name and assigning them by lot from the tribes of the Judahites, Simeonites, and Benjaminites.

    46: The other Kohathites obtained ten cities by lot for their clans from the tribe of Ephraim, from the tribe of Dan, and from the half-tribe of Manasseh. 
    47: The clans of the Gershonites obtained thirteen cities from the tribes of Issachar, Asher, and Naphtali, and from the half-tribe of Manasseh in Bashan. 
    48: 
    49: The Israelites assigned these cities with their pasture lands to the Levites, 
    50: designating them by name and assigning them by lot from the tribes of the Judahites, Simeonites, and Benjaminites.
46 The other Kohathites obtained ten cities by lot for their clans from the tribe of Ephraim, from the tribe of Dan, and from the half-tribe of Manasseh. 47 The clans of the Gershonites obtained thirteen cities from the tribes of Issachar, Asher, and Naphtali, and from the half-tribe of Manasseh in Bashan. 48 The clans of the Merarites obtained twelve cities by lot from the tribes of Reuben, Gad, and Zebulun.

    51: The clans of the Kohathites obtained cities by lot from the tribe of Ephraim. 
    52: They were assigned cities of refuge: Shechem in the mountain region of Ephraim, with its pasture lands, Gezer with its pasture lands, 
    53: Kibzaim with its pasture lands, and Beth-horon with its pasture lands. 
    54: From the tribe of Dan: Elteke with its pasture lands, Gibbethon with its pasture lands, Aijalon with its pasture lands, and Gath-rimmon with its pasture lands. 
    55: From the half-tribe of Manasseh: Taanach with its pasture lands and Ibleam with its pasture lands. These belonged to the rest of the Kohathite clan.

    56: The clans of the Gershonites received from the half-tribe of Manasseh: Golan in Bashan with its pasture lands and Ashtaroth with its pasture lands. 
    57: From the tribe of Issachar: Kedesh with its pasture lands, Daberath with its pasture lands, 
    58: Ramoth with its pasture lands, and Engannim with its pasture lands. 
    59: From the tribe of Asher: Mashal with its pasture lands, Abdon with its pasture lands, 
    60: Hilkath with its pasture lands, and Rehob with its pasture lands. 
    61: From the tribe of Naphtali: Kedesh in Galilee with its pasture lands, Hammon with its pasture lands, and Kiriathaim with its pasture lands.

    62: The rest of the Merarites received from the tribe of Zebulun: Jokneam with its pasture lands, Kartah with its pasture lands, Rimmon with its pasture lands, and Tabor with its pasture lands. 
    63: Across the Jordan at Jericho (that is, east of the Jordan) they received from the tribe of Reuben: Bezer in the desert with its pasture lands, Jahzah with its pasture lands, 
    64: Kedemoth with its pasture lands, and Mephaath with its pasture lands. 
    65: From the tribe of Gad: Ramoth in Gilead with its pasture lands, Mahanaim with its pasture lands, 
    66: Heshbon with its pasture lands, and Jazer with its pasture lands.


  Chapter 7.

    1: The sons of Issachar were Tola, Puah, Jashub, and Shimron: four. 
    2: The sons of Tola were Uzzi, Rephaiah, Jeriel, Jahmai, Ibsam, and Shemuel, heads of the ancestral houses of Tola, mighty warriors in their generations. In the time of David they numbered twenty-two thousand six hundred. 
    3: The sons of Uzzi: Izarahiah. The sons of Izarahiah were Michael, Obadiah, Joel, and Isshiah. All five of these were chiefs. 
    4: Along with them, in their generations, according to ancestral houses, were thirty-six thousand men in organized military troops, since they had more wives and children 
    5: than their fellow tribesmen. In all the clans of Issachar there was a total of eighty-seven thousand warriors listed in their family records.
Benjamin. 
    6: 
    7: Issachar. 1 The sons of Issachar were Tola, Puah, Jashub, and Shimron: four. 2 The sons of Tola were Uzzi, Rephaiah, Jeriel, Jahmai, Ibsam, and Shemuel, heads of the ancestral houses of Tola, mighty warriors in their generations. In the time of David they numbered twenty-two thousand six hundred. 3 The sons of Uzzi: Izarahiah. The sons of Izarahiah were Michael, Obadiah, Joel, and Isshiah. All five of these were chiefs. 4 Along with them, in their generations, according to ancestral houses, were thirty-six thousand men in organized military troops, since they had more wives and children 5 than their fellow tribesmen. In all the clans of Issachar there was a total of eighty-seven thousand warriors listed in their family records.
Benjamin. 6 The sons of Benjamin were Bela, Becher, and Jediael—three. 7 The sons of Bela were Ezbon, Uzzi, Uzziel, Jerimoth, and Iri—five. They were heads of their ancestral houses and warriors. Their family records listed twenty-two thousand and thirty-four. 
    8: The sons of Becher were Zemirah, Joash, Eliezer, Elioenai, Omri, Jeremoth, Abijah, Anathoth, and Alemeth—all these were sons of Becher. 
    9: heir family records listed twenty thousand two hundred of their kindred who were heads of their ancestral houses and warriors. 
    10: The sons of Jediael: Bilhan. The sons of Bilhan were Jeush, Benjamin, Ehud, Chenaanah, Zethan, Tarshish, and Ahishahar. 
    11: All these were sons of Jediael, heads of ancestral houses and warriors. They numbered seventeen thousand two hundred men fit for military service… 
    12: Shupham and Hupham.
Dan, Naphtali and Manasseh. The sons of Dan: Hushim. 
    13: The sons of Naphtali were Jahziel, Guni, Jezer, and Shallum. These were sons of Bilhah. 
    14: The sons of Manasseh, whom his Aramean concubine bore: she bore Machir, the father of Gilead. 
    15: Machir took a wife whose name was Maacah; his sister’s name was Molecheth. Manasseh’s second son was named Zelophehad, who had only daughters. 
    16: Maacah, Machir’s wife, bore a son whom she named Peresh. He had a brother named Sheresh, whose sons were Ulam and Rakem. 
    17: The sons of Ulam: Bedan. These were the sons of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh. 
    18: His sister Molecheth bore Ishhod, Abiezer, and Mahlah. 
    19: The sons of Shemida were Ahian, Shechem, Likhi, and Aniam.
Ephraim. 
    20: The sons of Ephraim: Shuthelah, whose son was Bered, whose son was Tahath, whose son was Eleadah, whose son was Tahath, 
    21: whose son was Zabad. Ephraim’s son Shuthelah, and Ezer and Elead, who were born in the land, were killed by the inhabitants of Gath because they had gone down to take away their livestock. 
    22: Their father Ephraim mourned a long time, but after his relatives had come and comforted him, 
    23: he had relations with his wife, who conceived and bore a son whom he named Beriah, since evil had befallen his house. 
    24: He had a daughter, Sheerah, who built Lower and Upper Beth-horon and Uzzen-sheerah. 
    25: Zabad’s son was Rephah, whose son was Resheph, whose son was Telah, whose son was Tahan, 
    26: whose son was Ladan, whose son was Ammihud, whose son was Elishama, 
    27: whose son was Nun, whose son was Joshua.

    28: Their property and their dwellings were in Bethel and its towns, Naaran to the east, Gezer and its towns to the west, and also Shechem and its towns as far as Ayyah and its towns. 
    29: Manasseh, however, had possession of Beth-shean and its towns, Taanach and its towns, Megiddo and its towns, and Dor and its towns. In these dwelt the sons of Joseph, the son of Israel.
Asher. 
    30: The sons of Asher were Imnah, Ishvah, Ishvi, and Beriah; their sister was Serah. 
    31: Beriah’s sons were Heber and Malchiel, who was the father of Birzaith. 
    32: Heber became the father of Japhlet, Shomer, Hotham, and their sister Shua. 
    33: The sons of Japhlet were Pasach, Bimhal, and Ashvath; these were the sons of Japhlet. 
    34: The sons of Shomer were Ahi, Rohgah, Jehubbah, and Aram. 
    35: The sons of his brother Hotham were Zophah, Imna, Shelesh, and Amal. 
    36: The sons of Zophah were Suah, Harnepher, Shual, Beri, Imrah, 
    37: Bezer, Hod, Shamma, Shilshah, Ithran, and Beera. 
    38: The sons of Jether were Jephunneh, Pispa, and Ara. 
    39: The sons of Ulla were Arah, Hanniel, and Rizia. 
    40: All these were sons of Asher, heads of ancestral houses, distinguished men, warriors, and chiefs among the princes. Their family records numbered twenty-six thousand men fit for military service.


  Chapter 8.

    1: Benjamin became the father of Bela, his firstborn, Ashbel, the second son, Aharah, the third, 
    2: Nohah, the fourth, and Rapha, the fifth. 
    3: The sons of Bela were Addar and Gera, the father of Ehud. 
    4: The sons of Ehud were Abishua, Naaman, Ahoah, 
    5: Gera, Shephuphan, and Huram. 
    6: These were the sons of Ehud, family heads over those who dwelt in Geba and were deported to Manahath. 
    7: 
    8: Benjamin. 1 Benjamin became the father of Bela, his firstborn, Ashbel, the second son, Aharah, the third, 2 Nohah, the fourth, and Rapha, the fifth. 3 The sons of Bela were Addar and Gera, the father of Ehud. 4 The sons of Ehud were Abishua, Naaman, Ahoah, 5 Gera, Shephuphan, and Huram. 6 These were the sons of Ehud, family heads over those who dwelt in Geba and were deported to Manahath. 7 Also Naaman, Ahijah, and Gera. The last, who led them into exile, became the father of Uzza and Ahihud. 8 Shaharaim became a father on the Moabite plateau after he had put away his wives Hushim and Baara. 
    9: y his wife Hodesh he begot Jobab, Zibia, Mesha, Malcam, 
    10: Jeuz, Sachia, and Mirmah. These were his sons, family heads. 
    11: By Hushim he begot Abitub and Elpaal. 
    12: The sons of Elpaal were Eber, Misham, Shemed (who built Ono and Lod with its nearby towns), 
    13: and Beriah, and Shema. They were family heads of those who dwelt in Aijalon, and they put the inhabitants of Gath to flight. 
    14: Their relatives were Elpaal, Shashak, and Jeremoth. 
    15: Zebadiah, Arad, Eder, 
    16: Michael, Ishpah, and Joha were the sons of Beriah. 
    17: Zebadiah, Meshullam, Hizki, Heber, 
    18: Ishmerai, Izliah, and Jobab were the sons of Elpaal. 
    19: Jakim, Zichri, Zabdi, 
    20: Elienai, Zillethai, Eliel, 
    21: Adaiah, Beraiah, and Shimrath were the sons of Shimei. 
    22: Ishpan, Eber, Eliel, 
    23: Abdon, Zichri, Hanan, 
    24: Hananiah, Elam, Anthothijah, 
    25: Iphdeiah, and Penuel were the sons of Shashak. 
    26: Shamsherai, Shehariah, Athaliah, 
    27: Jaareshiah, Elijah, and Zichri were the sons of Jeroham. 
    28: These were family heads in their generations, chiefs who dwelt in Jerusalem.

    29: In Gibeon dwelt Jeiel, the founder of Gibeon, whose wife’s name was Maacah; 
    30: also his firstborn son, Abdon, and Zur, Kish, Baal, Ner, Nadab, 
    31: Gedor, Ahio, Zecher, and Mikloth. 
    32: Mikloth became the father of Shimeah. These, too, dwelt with their relatives in Jerusalem, opposite their fellow tribesmen. 
    33: Ner became the father of Kish, and Kish became the father of Saul. Saul became the father of Jonathan, Malchishua, Abinadab, and Eshbaal. 
    34: The son of Jonathan was Meribbaal, and Meribbaal became the father of Micah. 
    35: The sons of Micah were Pithon, Melech, Tarea, and Ahaz. 
    36: Ahaz became the father of Jehoaddah, and Jehoaddah became the father of Alemeth, Azmaveth, and Zimri. Zimri became the father of Moza. 
    37: Moza became the father of Binea, whose son was Raphah, whose son was Eleasah, whose son was Azel. 
    38: Azel had six sons, whose names were Azrikam, his firstborn, Ishmael, Sheariah, Azariah, Obadiah, and Hanan; all these were the sons of Azel. 
    39: The sons of Eshek, his brother, were Ulam, his firstborn, Jeush, the second son, and Eliphelet, the third. 
    40: The sons of Ulam were warriors, skilled with the bow, and they had many sons and grandsons: one hundred and fifty. All these were the sons of Benjamin.


End of day 90.