Day 304:

Reading John, chapters ['17', '18', '19', '20']:

  Chapter 17.

    1: 
The Prayer of Jesus. 1 When Jesus had said this, he raised his eyes to heaven[b] and said, “Father, the hour has come. Give glory to your son, so that your son may glorify you, 
    2: just as you gave him authority over all people, so that he may give eternal life to all you gave him. 
    3: Now this is eternal life, that they should know you, the only true God, and the one whom you sent, Jesus Christ. 
    4: I glorified you on earth by accomplishing the work that you gave me to do. 
    5: Now glorify me, Father, with you, with the glory that I had with you before the world began.

    6: 
    7: The Prayer of Jesus. 1 When Jesus had said this, he raised his eyes to heaven[b] and said, “Father, the hour has come. Give glory to your son, so that your son may glorify you, 2 [c]just as you gave him authority over all people, so that he may give eternal life to all you gave him. 3 [d]Now this is eternal life, that they should know you, the only true God, and the one whom you sent, Jesus Christ. 4 I glorified you on earth by accomplishing the work that you gave me to do. 5 Now glorify me, Father, with you, with the glory that I had with you before the world began.
6 “I revealed your name[e] to those whom you gave me out of the world. They belonged to you, and you gave them to me, and they have kept your word. 7 Now they know that everything you gave me is from you, 
    8: because the words you gave to me I have given to them, and they accepted them and truly understood that I came from you, and they have believed that you sent me. 
    9:  pray for them. I do not pray for the world but for the ones you have given me, because they are yours, 
    10: and everything of mine is yours and everything of yours is mine, and I have been glorified in them. 
    11: And now I will no longer be in the world, but they are in the world, while I am coming to you. Holy Father, keep them in your name that you have given me, so that they may be one just as we are. 
    12: When I was with them I protected them in your name that you gave me, and I guarded them, and none of them was lost except the son of destruction, in order that the scripture might be fulfilled. 
    13: But now I am coming to you. I speak this in the world so that they may share my joy completely. 
    14: I gave them your word, and the world hated them, because they do not belong to the world any more than I belong to the world. 
    15: I do not ask that you take them out of the world but that you keep them from the evil one. 
    16: 
    17: The Prayer of Jesus. 1 When Jesus had said this, he raised his eyes to heaven[b] and said, “Father, the hour has come. Give glory to your son, so that your son may glorify you, 2 [c]just as you gave him authority over all people, so that he may give eternal life to all you gave him. 3 [d]Now this is eternal life, that they should know you, the only true God, and the one whom you sent, Jesus Christ. 4 I glorified you on earth by accomplishing the work that you gave me to do. 5 Now glorify me, Father, with you, with the glory that I had with you before the world began.
6 “I revealed your name[e] to those whom you gave me out of the world. They belonged to you, and you gave them to me, and they have kept your word. 7 Now they know that everything you gave me is from you, 8 because the words you gave to me I have given to them, and they accepted them and truly understood that I came from you, and they have believed that you sent me. 9 I pray for them. I do not pray for the world but for the ones you have given me, because they are yours, 10 and everything of mine is yours and everything of yours is mine, and I have been glorified in them. 11 And now I will no longer be in the world, but they are in the world, while I am coming to you. Holy Father, keep them in your name that you have given me, so that they may be one just as we are. 12 When I was with them I protected them in your name that you gave me, and I guarded them, and none of them was lost except the son of destruction, in order that the scripture might be fulfilled. 13 But now I am coming to you. I speak this in the world so that they may share my joy completely. 14 I gave them your word, and the world hated them, because they do not belong to the world any more than I belong to the world. 15 [f]I do not ask that you take them out of the world but that you keep them from the evil one. 16 They do not belong to the world any more than I belong to the world. 17 Consecrate them in the truth. Your word is truth. 
    18: As you sent me into the world, so I sent them into the world. 
    19: And I consecrate myself for them, so that they also may be consecrated in truth.

    20: “I pray not only for them, but also for those who will believe in me through their word, 
    21: so that they may all be one, as you, Father, are in me and I in you, that they also may be in us, that the world may believe that you sent me. 
    22: And I have given them the glory you gave me, so that they may be one, as we are one, 
    23: I in them and you in me, that they may be brought to perfection as one, that the world may know that you sent me, and that you loved them even as you loved me. 
    24: Father, they are your gift to me. I wish that where I am they also may be with me, that they may see my glory that you gave me, because you loved me before the foundation of the world. 
    25: Righteous Father, the world also does not know you, but I know you, and they know that you sent me. 
    26: I made known to them your name and I will make it known, that the love with which you loved me may be in them and I in them.”


  Chapter 18.

    1: 
Jesus Arrested. 1 When he had said this, Jesus went out[b] with his disciples across the Kidron valley to where there was a garden, into which he and his disciples entered. 
    2: Judas his betrayer also knew the place, because Jesus had often met there with his disciples. 
    3: So Judas got a band of soldiers and guards from the chief priests and the Pharisees and went there with lanterns, torches, and weapons. 
    4: Jesus, knowing everything that was going to happen to him, went out and said to them, “Whom are you looking for?” 
    5: They answered him, “Jesus the Nazorean.” He said to them, “I AM.” Judas his betrayer was also with them. 
    6: When he said to them, “I AM,” they turned away and fell to the ground. 
    7: 
    8: Jesus Arrested. 1 When he had said this, Jesus went out[b] with his disciples across the Kidron valley to where there was a garden, into which he and his disciples entered. 2 Judas his betrayer also knew the place, because Jesus had often met there with his disciples. 3 So Judas got a band of soldiers[c] and guards from the chief priests and the Pharisees and went there with lanterns, torches, and weapons. 4 Jesus, knowing everything that was going to happen to him, went out and said to them, “Whom are you looking for?” 5 They answered him, “Jesus the Nazorean.”[d] He said to them, “I AM.” Judas his betrayer was also with them. 6 When he said to them, “I AM,” they turned away and fell to the ground. 7 So he again asked them, “Whom are you looking for?” They said, “Jesus the Nazorean.” 8 Jesus answered, “I told you that I AM. So if you are looking for me, let these men go.” 
    9: e]This was to fulfill what he had said, “I have not lost any of those you gave me.” 
    10: Then Simon Peter, who had a sword, drew it, struck the high priest’s slave, and cut off his right ear. The slave’s name was Malchus. 
    11: Jesus said to Peter, “Put your sword into its scabbard. Shall I not drink the cup that the Father gave me?”

    12: So the band of soldiers, the tribune, and the Jewish guards seized Jesus, bound him, 
    13: and brought him to Annas first. He was the father-in-law of Caiaphas, who was high priest that year. 
    14: It was Caiaphas who had counseled the Jews that it was better that one man should die rather than the people.
Peter’s First Denial. 
    15: Simon Peter and another disciple followed Jesus. Now the other disciple was known to the high priest, and he entered the courtyard of the high priest with Jesus. 
    16: But Peter stood at the gate outside. So the other disciple, the acquaintance of the high priest, went out and spoke to the gatekeeper and brought Peter in. 
    17: 
    18: Jesus Arrested. 1 When he had said this, Jesus went out[b] with his disciples across the Kidron valley to where there was a garden, into which he and his disciples entered. 2 Judas his betrayer also knew the place, because Jesus had often met there with his disciples. 3 So Judas got a band of soldiers[c] and guards from the chief priests and the Pharisees and went there with lanterns, torches, and weapons. 4 Jesus, knowing everything that was going to happen to him, went out and said to them, “Whom are you looking for?” 5 They answered him, “Jesus the Nazorean.”[d] He said to them, “I AM.” Judas his betrayer was also with them. 6 When he said to them, “I AM,” they turned away and fell to the ground. 7 So he again asked them, “Whom are you looking for?” They said, “Jesus the Nazorean.” 8 Jesus answered, “I told you that I AM. So if you are looking for me, let these men go.” 9 [e]This was to fulfill what he had said, “I have not lost any of those you gave me.” 10 Then Simon Peter, who had a sword, drew it, struck the high priest’s slave, and cut off his right ear. The slave’s name was Malchus.[f] 11 Jesus said to Peter, “Put your sword into its scabbard. Shall I not drink the cup[g] that the Father gave me?”
12 So the band of soldiers, the tribune, and the Jewish guards seized Jesus, bound him, 13 and brought him to Annas[h] first. He was the father-in-law of Caiaphas, who was high priest that year. 14 It was Caiaphas who had counseled the Jews that it was better that one man should die rather than the people.
Peter’s First Denial. 15 Simon Peter and another disciple[i] followed Jesus. Now the other disciple was known to the high priest, and he entered the courtyard of the high priest with Jesus. 16 But Peter stood at the gate outside. So the other disciple, the acquaintance of the high priest, went out and spoke to the gatekeeper and brought Peter in. 17 Then the maid who was the gatekeeper said to Peter, “You are not one of this man’s disciples, are you?” He said, “I am not.” 18 Now the slaves and the guards were standing around a charcoal fire that they had made, because it was cold, and were warming themselves. Peter was also standing there keeping warm.
The Inquiry Before Annas. 
    19: The high priest questioned Jesus about his disciples and about his doctrine. 
    20: Jesus answered him, “I have spoken publicly to the world. I have always taught in a synagogue or in the temple area where all the Jews gather, and in secret I have said nothing. 
    21: Why ask me? Ask those who heard me what I said to them. They know what I said.” 
    22: When he had said this, one of the temple guards standing there struck Jesus and said, “Is this the way you answer the high priest?” 
    23: Jesus answered him, “If I have spoken wrongly, testify to the wrong; but if I have spoken rightly, why do you strike me?” 
    24: Then Annas sent him bound to Caiaphas the high priest.
Peter Denies Jesus Again. 
    25: Now Simon Peter was standing there keeping warm. And they said to him, “You are not one of his disciples, are you?” He denied it and said, “I am not.” 
    26: One of the slaves of the high priest, a relative of the one whose ear Peter had cut off, said, “Didn’t I see you in the garden with him?” 
    27: Again Peter denied it. And immediately the cock crowed.
The Trial Before Pilate. 
    28: Then they brought Jesus from Caiaphas to the praetorium. It was morning. And they themselves did not enter the praetorium, in order not to be defiled so that they could eat the Passover. 
    29: So Pilate came out to them and said, “What charge do you bring  this man?” 
    30: They answered and said to him, “If he were not a criminal, we would not have handed him over to you.” 
    31: At this, Pilate said to them, “Take him yourselves, and judge him according to your law.” The Jews answered him, “We do not have the right to execute anyone,” 
    32: in order that the word of Jesus might be fulfilled that he said indicating the kind of death he would die. 
    33: So Pilate went back into the praetorium and summoned Jesus and said to him, “Are you the King of the Jews?” 
    34: Jesus answered, “Do you say this on your own or have others told you about me?” 
    35: Pilate answered, “I am not a Jew, am I? Your own nation and the chief priests handed you over to me. What have you done?” 
    36: Jesus answered, “My kingdom does not belong to this world. If my kingdom did belong to this world, my attendants  be fighting to keep me from being handed over to the Jews. But as it is, my kingdom is not here.” 
    37: So Pilate said to him, “Then you are a king?” Jesus answered, “You say I am a king. For this I was born and for this I came into the world, to testify to the truth. Everyone who belongs to the truth listens to my voice.” 
    38: Pilate said to him, “What is truth?”
When he had said this, he again went out to the Jews and said to them, “I find no guilt in him. 
    39: But you have a custom that I release one prisoner to you at Passover. Do you want me to release to you the King of the Jews?” 
    40: They cried out again, “Not this one but Barabbas!” Now Barabbas was a revolutionary.


  Chapter 19.

    1: 
1 Then Pilate took Jesus and had him scourged. 
    2: And the soldiers wove a crown out of thorns and placed it on his head, and clothed him in a purple cloak, 
    3: and they came to him and said, “Hail, King of the Jews!” And they struck him repeatedly. 
    4: Once more Pilate went out and said to them, “Look, I am bringing him out to you, so that you may know that I find no guilt in him.” 
    5: So Jesus came out, wearing the crown of thorns and the purple cloak. And he said to them, “Behold, the man!” 
    6: When the chief priests and the guards saw him they cried out, “Crucify him, crucify him!” Pilate said to them, “Take him yourselves and crucify him. I find no guilt in him.” 
    7: The Jews answered, “We have a law, and according to that law he ought to die, because he made himself the Son of God.” 
    8: 
    9:  Then Pilate took Jesus and had him scourged. 2 And the soldiers wove a crown out of thorns and placed it on his head, and clothed him in a purple cloak, 3 and they came to him and said, “Hail, King of the Jews!” And they struck him repeatedly. 4 Once more Pilate went out and said to them, “Look, I am bringing him out to you, so that you may know that I find no guilt in him.” 5 So Jesus came out, wearing the crown of thorns and the purple cloak. And he said to them, “Behold, the man!” 6 When the chief priests and the guards saw him they cried out, “Crucify him, crucify him!” Pilate said to them, “Take him yourselves and crucify him. I find no guilt in him.” 7 [b]The Jews answered, “We have a law, and according to that law he ought to die, because he made himself the Son of God.” 8 Now when Pilate heard this statement, he became even more afraid, 9 and went back into the praetorium and said to Jesus, “Where are you from?” Jesus did not answer him. 
    10: So Pilate said to him, “Do you not speak to me? Do you not know that I have power to release you and I have power to crucify you?” 
    11: Jesus answered , “You would have no power over me if it had not been given to you from above. For this reason the one who handed me over to you has the greater sin.” 
    12: Consequently, Pilate tried to release him; but the Jews cried out, “If you release him, you are not a Friend of Caesar. Everyone who makes himself a king opposes Caesar.”

    13: When Pilate heard these words he brought Jesus out and seated him on the judge’s bench in the place called Stone Pavement, in Hebrew, Gabbatha. 
    14: It was preparation day for Passover, and it was about noon. And he said to the Jews, “Behold, your king!” 
    15: They cried out, “Take him away, take him away! Crucify him!” Pilate said to them, “Shall I crucify your king?” The chief priests answered, “We have no king but Caesar.” 
    16: Then he handed him over to them to be crucified.
The Crucifixion of Jesus. So they took Jesus, 
    17: and carrying the cross himself he went out to what is called the Place of the Skull, in Hebrew, Golgotha. 
    18: 
    19: 1 Then Pilate took Jesus and had him scourged. 2 And the soldiers wove a crown out of thorns and placed it on his head, and clothed him in a purple cloak, 3 and they came to him and said, “Hail, King of the Jews!” And they struck him repeatedly. 4 Once more Pilate went out and said to them, “Look, I am bringing him out to you, so that you may know that I find no guilt in him.” 5 So Jesus came out, wearing the crown of thorns and the purple cloak. And he said to them, “Behold, the man!” 6 When the chief priests and the guards saw him they cried out, “Crucify him, crucify him!” Pilate said to them, “Take him yourselves and crucify him. I find no guilt in him.” 7 [b]The Jews answered, “We have a law, and according to that law he ought to die, because he made himself the Son of God.” 8 Now when Pilate heard this statement, he became even more afraid, 9 and went back into the praetorium and said to Jesus, “Where are you from?” Jesus did not answer him. 10 So Pilate said to him, “Do you not speak to me? Do you not know that I have power to release you and I have power to crucify you?” 11 Jesus answered [him], “You would have no power over me if it had not been given to you from above. For this reason the one who handed me over to you has the greater sin.” 12 Consequently, Pilate tried to release him; but the Jews cried out, “If you release him, you are not a Friend of Caesar.[c] Everyone who makes himself a king opposes Caesar.”
13 When Pilate heard these words he brought Jesus out and seated him[d] on the judge’s bench in the place called Stone Pavement, in Hebrew, Gabbatha. 14 It was preparation day for Passover, and it was about noon.[e] And he said to the Jews, “Behold, your king!” 15 They cried out, “Take him away, take him away! Crucify him!” Pilate said to them, “Shall I crucify your king?” The chief priests answered, “We have no king but Caesar.” 16 Then he handed him over to them to be crucified.[f]
The Crucifixion of Jesus. So they took Jesus, 17 and carrying the cross himself[g] he went out to what is called the Place of the Skull, in Hebrew, Golgotha. 18 There they crucified him, and with him two others, one on either side, with Jesus in the middle. 19 [h]Pilate also had an inscription written and put on the cross. It read, “Jesus the Nazorean, the King of the Jews.” 
    20: Now many of the Jews read this inscription, because the place where Jesus was crucified was near the city; and it was written in Hebrew, Latin, and Greek. 
    21: So the chief priests of the Jews said to Pilate, “Do not write ‘The King of the Jews,’ but that he said, ‘I am the King of the Jews.’” 
    22: Pilate answered, “What I have written, I have written.”

    23: When the soldiers had crucified Jesus, they took his clothes and divided them into four shares, a share for each soldier. They also took his tunic, but the tunic was seamless, woven in one piece from the top down. 
    24: So they said to one another, “Let’s not tear it, but cast lots for it to see whose it will be,” in order that the passage of scripture might be fulfilled :
“They divided my garments among them,
    and for my vesture they cast lots.”
This is what the soldiers did. 
    25: Standing by the cross of Jesus were his mother and his mother’s sister, Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary of Magdala. 
    26: When Jesus saw his mother and the disciple there whom he loved, he said to his mother, “Woman, behold, your son.” 
    27: Then he said to the disciple, “Behold, your mother.” And from that hour the disciple took her into his home.

    28: After this, aware that everything was now finished, in order that the scripture might be fulfilled, Jesus said, “I thirst.” 
    29: There was a vessel filled with common wine. So they put a sponge soaked in wine on a sprig of hyssop and put it up to his mouth. 
    30: When Jesus had taken the wine, he said, “It is finished.” And bowing his head, he handed over the spirit.
The Blood and Water. 
    31: Now since it was preparation day, in order that the bodies might not remain on the cross on the sabbath, for the sabbath day of that week was a solemn one, the Jews asked Pilate that their legs be broken and they be taken down. 
    32: So the soldiers came and broke the legs of the first and then of the other one who was crucified with Jesus. 
    33: But when they came to Jesus and saw that he was already dead, they did not break his legs, 
    34: but one soldier thrust his lance into his side, and immediately blood and water flowed out. 
    35: An eyewitness has testified, and his testimony is true; he knows that he is speaking the truth, so that you also may [come to] believe. 
    36: For this happened so that the scripture passage might be fulfilled:
“Not a bone of it will be broken.”

    37: And again another passage says:
“They will look upon him whom they have pierced.”
The Burial of Jesus. 
    38: After this, Joseph of Arimathea, secretly a disciple of Jesus for fear of the Jews, asked Pilate if he could remove the body of Jesus. And Pilate permitted it. So he came and took his body. 
    39: Nicodemus, the one who had first come to him at night, also came bringing a mixture of myrrh and aloes weighing about one hundred pounds. 
    40: They took the body of Jesus and bound it with burial cloths along with the spices, according to the Jewish burial custom. 
    41: Now in the place where he had been crucified there was a garden, and in the garden a new tomb, in which no one had yet been buried. 
    42: So they laid Jesus there because of the Jewish preparation day; for the tomb was close by.


  Chapter 20.

    1: 
    2: 
The Empty Tomb.[b] 1 On the first day of the week, Mary of Magdala came to the tomb early in the morning, while it was still dark,[c] and saw the stone removed from the tomb. 2 So she ran[d] and went to Simon Peter and to the other disciple whom Jesus loved, and told them, “They have taken the Lord from the tomb, and we don’t know where they put him.” 
    3: So Peter and the other disciple went out and came to the tomb. 
    4: They both ran, but the other disciple ran faster than Peter and arrived at the tomb first; 
    5: he bent down and saw the burial cloths there, but did not go in. 
    6: When Simon Peter arrived after him, he went into the tomb and saw the burial cloths there, 
    7: and the cloth that had covered his head, not with the burial cloths but rolled up in a separate place. 
    8: Then the other disciple also went in, the one who had arrived at the tomb first, and he saw and believed. 
    9: g]For they did not yet understand the scripture that he had to rise from the dead. 
    10: Then the disciples returned home.
The Appearance to Mary of Magdala. 
    11: But Mary stayed outside the tomb weeping. And as she wept, she bent over into the tomb 
    12: and saw two angels in white sitting there, one at the head and one at the feet where the body of Jesus had been. 
    13: And they said to her, “Woman, why are you weeping?” She said to them, “They have taken my Lord, and I don’t know where they laid him.” 
    14: When she had said this, she turned around and saw Jesus there, but did not know it was Jesus. 
    15: Jesus said to her, “Woman, why are you weeping? Whom are you looking for?” She thought it was the gardener and said to him, “Sir, if you carried him away, tell me where you laid him, and I will take him.” 
    16: Jesus said to her, “Mary!” She turned and said to him in Hebrew, “Rabbouni,” which means Teacher. 
    17: Jesus said to her, “Stop holding on to me, for I have not yet ascended to the Father. But go to my brothers and tell them, ‘I am going to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God.’” 
    18: Mary of Magdala went and announced to the disciples, “I have seen the Lord,” and what he told her.
Appearance to the Disciples. 
    19: 
    20: a]
The Empty Tomb.[b] 1 On the first day of the week, Mary of Magdala came to the tomb early in the morning, while it was still dark,[c] and saw the stone removed from the tomb. 2 So she ran[d] and went to Simon Peter and to the other disciple whom Jesus loved, and told them, “They have taken the Lord from the tomb, and we don’t know where they put him.” 3 [e]So Peter and the other disciple went out and came to the tomb. 4 They both ran, but the other disciple ran faster than Peter and arrived at the tomb first; 5 he bent down and saw the burial cloths there, but did not go in. 6 When Simon Peter arrived after him, he went into the tomb and saw the burial cloths[f] there, 7 and the cloth that had covered his head, not with the burial cloths but rolled up in a separate place. 8 Then the other disciple also went in, the one who had arrived at the tomb first, and he saw and believed. 9 [g]For they did not yet understand the scripture that he had to rise from the dead. 10 Then the disciples returned home.
The Appearance to Mary of Magdala.[h] 11 But Mary stayed outside the tomb weeping. And as she wept, she bent over into the tomb 12 and saw two angels in white sitting there, one at the head and one at the feet where the body of Jesus had been. 13 And they said to her, “Woman, why are you weeping?” She said to them, “They have taken my Lord, and I don’t know where they laid him.” 14 When she had said this, she turned around and saw Jesus there, but did not know it was Jesus. 15 Jesus said to her, “Woman, why are you weeping? Whom are you looking for?” She thought it was the gardener and said to him, “Sir, if you carried him away, tell me where you laid him, and I will take him.” 16 Jesus said to her, “Mary!” She turned and said to him in Hebrew, “Rabbouni,”[i] which means Teacher. 17 Jesus said to her, “Stop holding on to me,[j] for I have not yet ascended to the Father. But go to my brothers and tell them, ‘I am going to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God.’” 18 Mary of Magdala went and announced to the disciples, “I have seen the Lord,” and what he told her.
Appearance to the Disciples.[k] 19 On the evening of that first day of the week, when the doors were locked, where the disciples[l] were, for fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in their midst and said to them, “Peace be with you.” 20 When he had said this, he showed them his hands and his side.[m] The disciples rejoiced when they saw the Lord. 
    21: [Jesus] said to them again, “Peace be with you. As the Father has sent me, so I send you.” 
    22: And when he had said this, he breathed on them and said to them, “Receive the holy Spirit. 
    23: Whose sins you forgive are forgiven them, and whose sins you retain are retained.”
Thomas. 
    24: Thomas, called Didymus, one of the Twelve, was not with them when Jesus came. 
    25: So the other disciples said to him, “We have seen the Lord.” But he said to them, “Unless I see the mark of the nails in his hands and put my finger into the nailmarks and put my hand into his side, I will not believe.” 
    26: Now a week later his disciples were again inside and Thomas was with them. Jesus came, although the doors were locked, and stood in their midst and said, “Peace be with you.” 
    27: Then he said to Thomas, “Put your finger here and see my hands, and bring your hand and put it into my side, and do not be unbelieving, but believe.” 
    28: Thomas answered and said to him, “My Lord and my God!” 
    29: Jesus said to him, “Have you come to believe because you have seen me? Blessed are those who have not seen and have believed.”
Conclusion.[s] 
    30: Now Jesus did many other signs in the presence of  disciples that are not written in this book. 
    31: But these are written that you may  believe that Jesus is the Messiah, the Son of God, and that through this belief you may have life in his name.


End of day 304.