Day 321:

Reading 2-Corinthians, chapters ['1', '2', '3', '4']:

  Chapter 1.

    1: Greeting. 1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, and Timothy our brother, to the church of God that is in Corinth, with all the holy ones throughout Achaia: 
    2: grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Thanksgiving. 
    3: Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of compassion and God of all encouragement, 
    4: who encourages us in our every affliction, so that we may be able to encourage those who are in any affliction with the encouragement with which we ourselves are encouraged by God. 
    5: For as Christ’s sufferings overflow to us, so through Christ does our encouragement also overflow. 
    6: If we are afflicted, it is for your encouragement and salvation; if we are encouraged, it is for your encouragement, which enables you to endure the same sufferings that we suffer. 
    7: Our hope for you is firm, for we know that as you share in the sufferings, you also share in the encouragement.

    8: We do not want you to be unaware, brothers, of the affliction that came to us in the province of Asia; we were utterly weighed down beyond our strength, so that we despaired even of life. 
    9: ndeed, we had accepted within ourselves the sentence of death, that we might trust not in ourselves but in God who raises the dead. 
    10: He rescued us from such great danger of death, and he will continue to rescue us; in him we have put our hope  he will also rescue us again, 
    11: as you help us with prayer, so that thanks may be given by many on our behalf for the gift granted us through the prayers of many.
II. The Crisis Between Paul and the Corinthians
A. Past Relationships
Paul’s Sincerity and Constancy. 
    12: For our boast is this, the testimony of our conscience that we have conducted ourselves in the world, and especially toward you, with the simplicity and sincerity of God, [and] not by human wisdom but by the grace of God. 
    13: For we write you nothing but what you can read and understand, and I hope that you will understand completely, 
    14: as you have come to understand us partially, that we are your boast as you also are ours, on the day of  Lord Jesus.

    15: With this confidence I formerly intended to come to you so that you might receive a double favor, 
    16: namely, to go by way of you to Macedonia, and then to come to you again on my return from Macedonia, and have you send me on my way to Judea. 
    17: So when I intended this, did I act lightly? Or do I make my plans according to human considerations, so that with me it is “yes, yes” and “no, no”? 
    18: As God is faithful, our word to you is not “yes” and “no.” 
    19: For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, who was proclaimed to you by us, Silvanus and Timothy and me, was not “yes” and “no,” but “yes” has been in him. 
    20: For however many are the promises of God, their Yes is in him; therefore, the Amen from us also goes through him to God for glory. 
    21: But the one who gives us security with you in Christ and who anointed us is God; 
    22: he has also put his seal upon us and given the Spirit in our hearts as a first installment.
Paul’s Change of Plan. 
    23: But I call upon God as witness, on my life, that it is to spare you that I have not yet gone to Corinth. 
    24: Not that we lord it over your faith; rather, we work together for your joy, for you stand firm in the faith.


  Chapter 2.

    1: 
    2: 1 For I decided not to come to you again in painful circumstances. 2 For if I inflict pain upon you, then who is there to cheer me except the one pained by me? 
    3: And I wrote as I did so that when I came I might not be pained by those in whom I should have rejoiced, confident about all of you that my joy is that of all of you. 
    4: For out of much affliction and anguish of heart I wrote to you with many tears, not that you might be pained but that you might know the abundant love I have for you.
The Offender. 
    5: If anyone has caused pain, he has caused it not to me, but in some measure (not to exaggerate) to all of you. 
    6: This punishment by the majority is enough for such a person, 
    7: so that on the contrary you should forgive and encourage him instead, or else the person may be overwhelmed by excessive pain. 
    8: Therefore, I urge you to reaffirm your love for him. 
    9: or this is why I wrote, to know your proven character, whether you were obedient in everything. 
    10: Whomever you forgive anything, so do I. For indeed what I have forgiven, if I have forgiven anything, has been for you in the presence of Christ, 
    11: so that we might not be taken advantage of by Satan, for we are not unaware of his purposes.
Paul’s Anxiety. 
    12: When I went to Troas for the gospel of Christ, although a door was opened for me in the Lord, 
    13: I had no relief in my spirit because I did not find my brother Titus. So I took leave of them and went on to Macedonia.
B. Paul’s Ministry[e]
Ministers of a New Covenant. 
    14: But thanks be to God,[g] who always leads us in triumph in Christ[h] and manifests through us the odor of the knowledge of him[i] in every place. 
    15: For we are the aroma of Christ for God among those who are being saved and among those who are perishing, 
    16: to the latter an odor of death that leads to death, to the former an odor of life that leads to life. Who is qualified for this? 
    17: For we are not like the many who trade on the word of God; but as out of sincerity, indeed as from God and in the presence of God, we speak in Christ.


  Chapter 3.

    1: Are we beginning to commend ourselves again? Or do we need, as some do, letters of recommendation to you or from you? 
    2: 
    3: 1 Are we beginning to commend ourselves again? Or do we need, as some do, letters of recommendation to you or from you? 2 You are our letter,[b] written on our hearts, known and read by all, 3 [c]shown to be a letter of Christ administered by us, written not in ink but by the Spirit of the living God, not on tablets of stone but on tablets that are hearts of flesh.

    4: Such confidence we have through Christ toward God. 
    5: Not that of ourselves we are qualified to take credit for anything as coming from us; rather, our qualification comes from God, 
    6: who has indeed qualified us as ministers of a new covenant, not of letter but of spirit; for the letter brings death, but the Spirit gives life.
Contrast with the Old Covenant. 
    7: Now if the ministry of death,[g] carved in letters on stone, was so glorious that the Israelites could not look intently at the face of Moses because of its glory that was going to fade, 
    8: how much more will the ministry of the Spirit be glorious? 
    9: or if the ministry of condemnation was glorious, the ministry of righteousness will abound much more in glory. 
    10: Indeed, what was endowed with glory has come to have no glory in this respect because of the glory that surpasses it. 
    11: For if what was going to fade was glorious, how much more will what endures be glorious.

    12: Therefore, since we have such hope, we act very boldly 
    13: and not like Moses, who put a veil over his face so that the Israelites could not look intently at the cessation of what was fading. 
    14: Rather, their thoughts were rendered dull, for to this present day the same veil remains unlifted when they read the old covenant, because through Christ it is taken away. 
    15: To this day, in fact, whenever Moses is read, a veil lies over their hearts, 
    16: but whenever a person turns to the Lord the veil is removed. 
    17: Now the Lord is the Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is freedom. 
    18: All of us, gazing with unveiled face on the glory of the Lord, are being transformed into the same image from glory to glory, as from the Lord who is the Spirit.


  Chapter 4.

    1: Therefore, since we have this ministry through the mercy shown us, we are not discouraged. 
    2: Rather, we have renounced shameful, hidden things; not acting deceitfully or falsifying the word of God, but by the open declaration of the truth we commend ourselves to everyone’s conscience in the sight of God. 
    3: 
    4: Integrity in the Ministry. 1 Therefore, since we have this ministry through the mercy shown us, we are not discouraged. 2 Rather, we have renounced shameful, hidden things; not acting deceitfully or falsifying the word of God, but by the open declaration of the truth we commend ourselves to everyone’s conscience in the sight of God. 3 And even though our gospel is veiled,[b] it is veiled for those who are perishing, 4 in whose case the god of this age has blinded the minds of the unbelievers, so that they may not see the light of the gospel of the glory of Christ, who is the image of God. 
    5: For we do not preach ourselves but Jesus Christ as Lord, and ourselves as your slaves for the sake of Jesus. 
    6: For God who said, “Let light shine out of darkness,” has shone in our hearts to bring to light the knowledge of the glory of God on the face of [Jesus] Christ.
The Paradox of the Ministry. 
    7: But we hold this treasure[f] in earthen vessels, that the surpassing power may be of God and not from us. 
    8: We are afflicted in every way, but not constrained; perplexed, but not driven to despair; 
    9: ersecuted, but not abandoned; struck down, but not destroyed; 
    10: always carrying about in the body the dying of Jesus, so that the life of Jesus may also be manifested in our body. 
    11: For we who live are constantly being given up to death for the sake of Jesus, so that the life of Jesus may be manifested in our mortal flesh.

    12: So death is at work in us, but life in you. 
    13: Since, then, we have the same spirit of faith, according to what is written, “I believed, therefore I spoke,” we too believe and therefore speak, 
    14: knowing that the one who raised the Lord Jesus will raise us also with Jesus and place us with you in his presence. 
    15: Everything indeed is for you, so that the grace bestowed in abundance on more and more people may cause the thanksgiving to overflow for the glory of God.

    16: Therefore, we are not discouraged;[l] rather, although our outer self is wasting away, our inner self is being renewed day by day. 
    17: For this momentary light affliction is producing for us an eternal weight of glory beyond all comparison, 
    18: as we look not to what is seen but to what is unseen; for what is seen is transitory, but what is unseen is eternal.


End of day 321.