Day 297:

Reading Luke, chapters ['13', '14', '15', '16']:

  Chapter 13.

    1: 
A Call to Repentance. 1 At that time some people who were present there told him about the Galileans whose blood Pilate[b] had mingled with the blood of their sacrifices. 
    2: 
    3: A Call to Repentance. 1 At that time some people who were present there told him about the Galileans whose blood Pilate[b] had mingled with the blood of their sacrifices. 2 He said to them in reply, “Do you think that because these Galileans suffered in this way they were greater sinners than all other Galileans? 3 By no means! But I tell you, if you do not repent, you will all perish as they did! 
    4: Or those eighteen people who were killed when the tower at Siloam fell on them—do you think they were more guilty than everyone else who lived in Jerusalem? 
    5: By no means! But I tell you, if you do not repent, you will all perish as they did!”
The Parable of the Barren Fig Tree. 
    6: And he told them this parable: “There once was a person who had a fig tree planted in his orchard, and when he came in search of fruit on it but found none, 
    7: he said to the gardener, ‘For three years now I have come in search of fruit on this fig tree but have found none.  cut it down. Why should it exhaust the soil?’ 
    8: He said to him in reply, ‘Sir, leave it for this year also, and I shall cultivate the ground around it and fertilize it; 
    9: t may bear fruit in the future. If not you can cut it down.’”
Cure of a Crippled Woman on the Sabbath. 
    10: He was teaching in a synagogue on the sabbath. 
    11: And a woman was there who for eighteen years had been crippled by a spirit; she was bent over, completely incapable of standing erect. 
    12: 
    13: A Call to Repentance. 1 At that time some people who were present there told him about the Galileans whose blood Pilate[b] had mingled with the blood of their sacrifices. 2 He said to them in reply, “Do you think that because these Galileans suffered in this way they were greater sinners than all other Galileans? 3 By no means! But I tell you, if you do not repent, you will all perish as they did! 4 Or those eighteen people who were killed when the tower at Siloam fell on them[c]—do you think they were more guilty than everyone else who lived in Jerusalem? 5 By no means! But I tell you, if you do not repent, you will all perish as they did!”
The Parable of the Barren Fig Tree.[d] 6 And he told them this parable: “There once was a person who had a fig tree planted in his orchard, and when he came in search of fruit on it but found none, 7 he said to the gardener, ‘For three years now I have come in search of fruit on this fig tree but have found none. [So] cut it down. Why should it exhaust the soil?’ 8 He said to him in reply, ‘Sir, leave it for this year also, and I shall cultivate the ground around it and fertilize it; 9 it may bear fruit in the future. If not you can cut it down.’”
Cure of a Crippled Woman on the Sabbath.[e] 10 He was teaching in a synagogue on the sabbath. 11 And a woman was there who for eighteen years had been crippled by a spirit; she was bent over, completely incapable of standing erect. 12 When Jesus saw her, he called to her and said, “Woman, you are set free of your infirmity.” 13 He laid his hands on her, and she at once stood up straight and glorified God. 
    14: But the leader of the synagogue, indignant that Jesus had cured on the sabbath, said to the crowd in reply, “There are six days when work should be done. Come on those days to be cured, not on the sabbath day.” 
    15: The Lord said to him in reply, “Hypocrites! Does not each one of you on the sabbath untie his ox or his ass from the manger and lead it out for watering? 
    16: This daughter of Abraham, whom Satan has bound for eighteen years now, ought she not to have been set free on the sabbath day from this bondage?” 
    17: When he said this, all his adversaries were humiliated; and the whole crowd rejoiced at all the splendid deeds done by him.
The Parable of the Mustard Seed. 
    18: Then he said, “What is the kingdom of God like? To what can I compare it? 
    19: It is like a mustard seed that a person took and planted in the garden. When it was fully grown, it became a large bush and ‘the birds of the sky dwelt in its branches.’”
The Parable of the Yeast. 
    20: Again he said, “To what shall I compare the kingdom of God? 
    21: It is like yeast that a woman took and mixed  with three measures of wheat flour until the whole batch of dough was leavened.”
The Narrow Door; Salvation and Rejection.[i] 
    22: He passed through towns and villages, teaching as he went and making his way to Jerusalem. 
    23: Someone asked him, “Lord, will only a few people be saved?” He answered them, 
    24: “Strive to enter through the narrow door, for many, I tell you, will attempt to enter but will not be strong enough. 
    25: After the master of the house has arisen and locked the door, then will you stand outside knocking and saying, ‘Lord, open the door for us.’ He will say to you in reply, ‘I do not know where you are from.’ 
    26: And you will say, ‘We ate and drank in your company and you taught in our streets.’ 
    27: Then he will say to you, ‘I do not know where  are from. Depart from me, all you evildoers!’ 
    28: And there will be wailing and grinding of teeth when you see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob and all the prophets in the kingdom of God and you yourselves cast out. 
    29: And people will come from the east and the west and from the north and the south and will recline at table in the kingdom of God. 
    30: For behold, some are last who will be first, and some are first who will be last.”
Herod’s Desire to Kill Jesus. 
    31: At that time some Pharisees came to him and said, “Go away, leave this area because Herod wants to kill you.” 
    32: He replied, “Go and tell that fox, ‘Behold, I cast out demons and I perform healings today and tomorrow, and on the third day I accomplish my purpose. 
    33: Yet I must continue on my way today, tomorrow, and the following day, for it is impossible that a prophet should die outside of Jerusalem.’
The Lament over Jerusalem. 
    34: “Jerusalem, Jerusalem, you who kill the prophets and stone those sent to you, how many times I yearned to gather your children together as a hen gathers her brood under her wings, but you were unwilling! 
    35: Behold, your house will be abandoned.  I tell you, you will not see me until [the time comes when] you say, ‘Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord.’”


  Chapter 14.

    1: 
Healing of the Man with Dropsy on the Sabbath. 1 On a sabbath he went to dine at the home of one of the leading Pharisees, and the people there were observing him carefully. 
    2: In front of him there was a man suffering from dropsy. 
    3: 
    4: Healing of the Man with Dropsy on the Sabbath. 1 On a sabbath he went to dine at the home of one of the leading Pharisees, and the people there were observing him carefully. 2 In front of him there was a man suffering from dropsy.[b] 3 Jesus spoke to the scholars of the law and Pharisees in reply, asking, “Is it lawful to cure on the sabbath or not?” 4 But they kept silent; so he took the man and, after he had healed him, dismissed him. 
    5: Then he said to them, “Who among you, if your son or ox falls into a cistern, would not immediately pull him out on the sabbath day?” 
    6: But they were unable to answer his question.
Conduct of Invited Guests and Hosts. 
    7: He told a parable to those who had been invited, noticing how they were choosing the places of honor at the table. 
    8: “When you are invited by someone to a wedding banquet, do not recline at table in the place of honor. A more distinguished guest than you may have been invited by him, 
    9: nd the host who invited both of you may approach you and say, ‘Give your place to this man,’ and then you would proceed with embarrassment to take the lowest place. 
    10: Rather, when you are invited, go and take the lowest place so that when the host comes to you he may say, ‘My friend, move up to a higher position.’ Then you will enjoy the esteem of your companions at the table. 
    11: For everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, but the one who humbles himself will be exalted.” 
    12: Then he said to the host who invited him, “When you hold a lunch or a dinner, do not invite your friends or your brothers or your relatives or your wealthy neighbors, in case they may invite you back and you have repayment. 
    13: 
    14: Healing of the Man with Dropsy on the Sabbath. 1 On a sabbath he went to dine at the home of one of the leading Pharisees, and the people there were observing him carefully. 2 In front of him there was a man suffering from dropsy.[b] 3 Jesus spoke to the scholars of the law and Pharisees in reply, asking, “Is it lawful to cure on the sabbath or not?” 4 But they kept silent; so he took the man and, after he had healed him, dismissed him. 5 Then he said to them, “Who among you, if your son or ox[c] falls into a cistern, would not immediately pull him out on the sabbath day?” 6 But they were unable to answer his question.
Conduct of Invited Guests and Hosts.[d] 7 He told a parable to those who had been invited, noticing how they were choosing the places of honor at the table. 8 “When you are invited by someone to a wedding banquet, do not recline at table in the place of honor. A more distinguished guest than you may have been invited by him, 9 and the host who invited both of you may approach you and say, ‘Give your place to this man,’ and then you would proceed with embarrassment to take the lowest place. 10 Rather, when you are invited, go and take the lowest place so that when the host comes to you he may say, ‘My friend, move up to a higher position.’ Then you will enjoy the esteem of your companions at the table. 11 For everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, but the one who humbles himself will be exalted.” 12 Then he said to the host who invited him, “When you hold a lunch or a dinner, do not invite your friends or your brothers or your relatives or your wealthy neighbors, in case they may invite you back and you have repayment. 13 Rather, when you hold a banquet, invite the poor, the crippled, the lame, the blind; 14 blessed indeed will you be because of their inability to repay you. For you will be repaid at the resurrection of the righteous.”
The Parable of the Great Feast.[e] 
    15: One of his fellow guests on hearing this said to him, “Blessed is the one who will dine in the kingdom of God.” 
    16: He replied to him, “A man gave a great dinner to which he invited many. 
    17: When the time for the dinner came, he dispatched his servant to say to those invited, ‘Come, everything is now ready.’ 
    18: But one by one, they all began to excuse themselves. The first said to him, ‘I have purchased a field and must go to examine it; I ask you, consider me excused.’ 
    19: And another said, ‘I have purchased five yoke of oxen and am on my way to evaluate them; I ask you, consider me excused.’ 
    20: And another said, ‘I have just married a woman, and therefore I cannot come.’ 
    21: The servant went and reported this to his master. Then the master of the house in a rage commanded his servant, ‘Go out quickly into the streets and alleys of the town and bring in here the poor and the crippled, the blind and the lame.’ 
    22: The servant reported, ‘Sir, your orders have been carried out and still there is room.’ 
    23: The master then ordered the servant, ‘Go out to the highways and hedgerows and make people come in that my home may be filled. 
    24: For, I tell you, none of those men who were invited will taste my dinner.’”
Sayings on Discipleship. 
    25: Great crowds were traveling with him, and he turned and addressed them, 
    26: “If any one comes to me without hating his father and mother, wife and children, brothers and sisters, and even his own life, he cannot be my disciple. 
    27: Whoever does not carry his own cross and come after me cannot be my disciple. 
    28: Which of you wishing to construct a tower does not first sit down and calculate the cost to see if there is enough for its completion? 
    29: Otherwise, after laying the foundation and finding himself unable to finish the work the onlookers should laugh at him 
    30: and say, ‘This one began to build but did not have the resources to finish.’ 
    31: Or what king marching into battle would not first sit down and decide whether with ten thousand troops he can successfully oppose another king advancing upon him with twenty thousand troops? 
    32: But if not, while he is still far away, he will send a delegation to ask for peace terms. 
    33: In the same way, everyone of you who does not renounce all his possessions cannot be my disciple.
The Simile of Salt. 
    34: “Salt is good, but if salt itself loses its taste, with what can its flavor be restored? 
    35: It is fit neither for the soil nor for the manure pile; it is thrown out. Whoever has ears to hear ought to hear.”


  Chapter 15.

    1: 
The Parable of the Lost Sheep. 1 The tax collectors and sinners were all drawing near to listen to him, 
    2: but the Pharisees and scribes began to complain, saying, “This man welcomes sinners and eats with them.” 
    3: So to them he addressed this parable. 
    4: 
    5: The Parable of the Lost Sheep. 1 The tax collectors and sinners were all drawing near to listen to him, 2 but the Pharisees and scribes began to complain, saying, “This man welcomes sinners and eats with them.” 3 So to them he addressed this parable. 4 “What man among you having a hundred sheep and losing one of them would not leave the ninety-nine in the desert and go after the lost one until he finds it? 5 And when he does find it, he sets it on his shoulders with great joy 
    6: and, upon his arrival home, he calls together his friends and neighbors and says to them, ‘Rejoice with me because I have found my lost sheep.’ 
    7: I tell you, in just the same way there will be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents than over ninety-nine righteous people who have no need of repentance.
The Parable of the Lost Coin. 
    8: “Or what woman having ten coins and losing one would not light a lamp and sweep the house, searching carefully until she finds it? 
    9: nd when she does find it, she calls together her friends and neighbors and says to them, ‘Rejoice with me because I have found the coin that I lost.’ 
    10: In just the same way, I tell you, there will be rejoicing among the angels of God over one sinner who repents.”
The Parable of the Lost Son. 
    11: Then he said, “A man had two sons, 
    12: and the younger son said to his father, ‘Father, give me the share of your estate that should come to me.’ So the father divided the property between them. 
    13: After a few days, the younger son collected all his belongings and set off to a distant country where he squandered his inheritance on a life of dissipation. 
    14: 
    15: The Parable of the Lost Sheep. 1 The tax collectors and sinners were all drawing near to listen to him, 2 but the Pharisees and scribes began to complain, saying, “This man welcomes sinners and eats with them.” 3 So to them he addressed this parable. 4 “What man among you having a hundred sheep and losing one of them would not leave the ninety-nine in the desert and go after the lost one until he finds it? 5 And when he does find it, he sets it on his shoulders with great joy 6 and, upon his arrival home, he calls together his friends and neighbors and says to them, ‘Rejoice with me because I have found my lost sheep.’ 7 I tell you, in just the same way there will be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents than over ninety-nine righteous people who have no need of repentance.
The Parable of the Lost Coin. 8 “Or what woman having ten coins[b] and losing one would not light a lamp and sweep the house, searching carefully until she finds it? 9 And when she does find it, she calls together her friends and neighbors and says to them, ‘Rejoice with me because I have found the coin that I lost.’ 10 In just the same way, I tell you, there will be rejoicing among the angels of God over one sinner who repents.”
The Parable of the Lost Son. 11 Then he said, “A man had two sons, 12 and the younger son said to his father, ‘Father, give me the share of your estate that should come to me.’ So the father divided the property between them. 13 After a few days, the younger son collected all his belongings and set off to a distant country where he squandered his inheritance on a life of dissipation. 14 When he had freely spent everything, a severe famine struck that country, and he found himself in dire need. 15 So he hired himself out to one of the local citizens who sent him to his farm to tend the swine. 
    16: And he longed to eat his fill of the pods on which the swine fed, but nobody gave him any. 
    17: Coming to his senses he thought, ‘How many of my father’s hired workers have more than enough food to eat, but here am I, dying from hunger. 
    18: I shall get up and go to my father and I shall say to him, “Father, I have sinned against heaven and against you. 
    19: I no longer deserve to be called your son; treat me as you would treat one of your hired workers.”’ 
    20: So he got up and went back to his father. While he was still a long way off, his father caught sight of him, and was filled with compassion. He ran to his son, embraced him and kissed him. 
    21: His son said to him, ‘Father, I have sinned against heaven and against you; I no longer deserve to be called your son.’ 
    22: But his father ordered his servants, ‘Quickly bring the finest robe and put it on him; put a ring on his finger and sandals on his feet. 
    23: Take the fattened calf and slaughter it. Then let us celebrate with a feast, 
    24: because this son of mine was dead, and has come to life again; he was lost, and has been found.’ Then the celebration began. 
    25: Now the older son had been out in the field and, on his way back, as he neared the house, he heard the sound of music and dancing. 
    26: He called one of the servants and asked what this might mean. 
    27: The servant said to him, ‘Your brother has returned and your father has slaughtered the fattened calf because he has him back safe and sound.’ 
    28: He became angry, and when he refused to enter the house, his father came out and pleaded with him. 
    29: He said to his father in reply, ‘Look, all these years I served you and not once did I disobey your orders; yet you never gave me even a young goat to feast on with my friends. 
    30: But when your son returns who swallowed up your property with prostitutes, for him you slaughter the fattened calf.’ 
    31: He said to him, ‘My son, you are here with me always; everything I have is yours. 
    32: But now we must celebrate and rejoice, because your brother was dead and has come to life again; he was lost and has been found.’”


  Chapter 16.

    1: 
The Parable of the Dishonest Steward. 1 Then he also said to his disciples, “A rich man had a steward who was reported to him for squandering his property. 
    2: He summoned him and said, ‘What is this I hear about you? Prepare a full account of your stewardship, because you can no longer be my steward.’ 
    3: The steward said to himself, ‘What shall I do, now that my master is taking the position of steward away from me? I am not strong enough to dig and I am ashamed to beg. 
    4: I know what I shall do so that, when I am removed from the stewardship, they may welcome me into their homes.’ 
    5: 
    6: The Parable of the Dishonest Steward. 1 Then he also said to his disciples, “A rich man had a steward who was reported to him for squandering his property. 2 He summoned him and said, ‘What is this I hear about you? Prepare a full account of your stewardship, because you can no longer be my steward.’ 3 The steward said to himself, ‘What shall I do, now that my master is taking the position of steward away from me? I am not strong enough to dig and I am ashamed to beg. 4 I know what I shall do so that, when I am removed from the stewardship, they may welcome me into their homes.’ 5 He called in his master’s debtors one by one. To the first he said, ‘How much do you owe my master?’ 6 [b]He replied, ‘One hundred measures of olive oil.’ He said to him, ‘Here is your promissory note. Sit down and quickly write one for fifty.’ 
    7: Then to another he said, ‘And you, how much do you owe?’ He replied, ‘One hundred kors of wheat.’ He said to him, ‘Here is your promissory note; write one for eighty.’ 
    8: And the master commended that dishonest steward for acting prudently.
Application of the Parable. “For the children of this world are more prudent in dealing with their own generation than are the children of light.[e] 
    9:  tell you, make friends for yourselves with dishonest wealth, so that when it fails, you will be welcomed into eternal dwellings. 
    10: The person who is trustworthy in very small matters is also trustworthy in great ones; and the person who is dishonest in very small matters is also dishonest in great ones. 
    11: If, therefore, you are not trustworthy with dishonest wealth, who will trust you with true wealth? 
    12: If you are not trustworthy with what belongs to another, who will give you what is yours? 
    13: No servant can serve two masters. He will either hate one and love the other, or be devoted to one and despise the other. You cannot serve God and mammon.”
A Saying Against the Pharisees. 
    14: The Pharisees, who loved money,[j] heard all these things and sneered at him. 
    15: 
    16: The Parable of the Dishonest Steward. 1 Then he also said to his disciples, “A rich man had a steward who was reported to him for squandering his property. 2 He summoned him and said, ‘What is this I hear about you? Prepare a full account of your stewardship, because you can no longer be my steward.’ 3 The steward said to himself, ‘What shall I do, now that my master is taking the position of steward away from me? I am not strong enough to dig and I am ashamed to beg. 4 I know what I shall do so that, when I am removed from the stewardship, they may welcome me into their homes.’ 5 He called in his master’s debtors one by one. To the first he said, ‘How much do you owe my master?’ 6 [b]He replied, ‘One hundred measures of olive oil.’ He said to him, ‘Here is your promissory note. Sit down and quickly write one for fifty.’ 7 Then to another he said, ‘And you, how much do you owe?’ He replied, ‘One hundred kors[c] of wheat.’ He said to him, ‘Here is your promissory note; write one for eighty.’ 8 And the master commended that dishonest steward for acting prudently.
Application of the Parable.[d] “For the children of this world are more prudent in dealing with their own generation than are the children of light.[e] 9 I tell you, make friends for yourselves with dishonest wealth,[f] so that when it fails, you will be welcomed into eternal dwellings. 10 [g]The person who is trustworthy in very small matters is also trustworthy in great ones; and the person who is dishonest in very small matters is also dishonest in great ones. 11 If, therefore, you are not trustworthy with dishonest wealth, who will trust you with true wealth? 12 If you are not trustworthy with what belongs to another, who will give you what is yours? 13 No servant can serve two masters.[h] He will either hate one and love the other, or be devoted to one and despise the other. You cannot serve God and mammon.”
A Saying Against the Pharisees. 14 [i]The Pharisees, who loved money,[j] heard all these things and sneered at him. 15 And he said to them, “You justify yourselves in the sight of others, but God knows your hearts; for what is of human esteem is an abomination in the sight of God.
Sayings About the Law. 16 “The law and the prophets lasted until John;[k] but from then on the kingdom of God is proclaimed, and everyone who enters does so with violence. 
    17: It is easier for heaven and earth to pass away than for the smallest part of a letter of the law to become invalid.
Sayings About Divorce. 
    18: “Everyone who divorces his wife and marries another commits adultery, and the one who marries a woman divorced from her husband commits adultery.
The Parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus. 
    19: “There was a rich man who dressed in purple garments and fine linen and dined sumptuously each day. 
    20: And lying at his door was a poor man named Lazarus, covered with sores, 
    21: who would gladly have eaten his fill of the scraps that fell from the rich man’s table. Dogs even used to come and lick his sores. 
    22: When the poor man died, he was carried away by angels to the bosom of Abraham. The rich man also died and was buried, 
    23: and from the netherworld, where he was in torment, he raised his eyes and saw Abraham far off and Lazarus at his side. 
    24: And he cried out, ‘Father Abraham, have pity on me. Send Lazarus to dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my tongue, for I am suffering torment in these flames.’ 
    25: Abraham replied, ‘My child, remember that you received what was good during your lifetime while Lazarus likewise received what was bad; but now he is comforted here, whereas you are tormented. 
    26: Moreover, between us and you a great chasm is established to prevent anyone from crossing who might wish to go from our side to yours or from your side to ours.’ 
    27: He said, ‘Then I beg you, father, send him to my father’s house, 
    28: for I have five brothers, so that he may warn them, lest they too come to this place of torment.’ 
    29: But Abraham replied, ‘They have Moses and the prophets. Let them listen to them.’ 
    30: He said, ‘Oh no, father Abraham, but if someone from the dead goes to them, they will repent.’ 
    31: Then Abraham said, ‘If they will not listen to Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded if someone should rise from the dead.’”


End of day 297.