Day 59:

Reading Judges, chapters ['17', '18', '19', '20']:

  Chapter 17.

    1: 
Micah and the Levite. 1 There was a man from the mountain region of Ephraim whose name was Micah. 
    2: He said to his mother, “The eleven hundred pieces of silver that were taken from you, about which you pronounced a curse and even said it in my hearing—I have that silver. I took it. So now I will restore it to you.” Then his mother said, “May my son be blessed by the Lord!” 
    3: When he restored the eleven hundred pieces of silver to his mother, she said, “I consecrate the silver to the Lord from my own hand on behalf of my son to make an idol overlaid with silver.” 
    4: So when he restored the silver to his mother, she took two hundred pieces and gave them to the silversmith, who made of them an idol overlaid with silver. So it remained in the house of Micah. 
    5: The man Micah had a shrine, and he made an ephod and teraphim, and installed one of his sons, who became his priest. 
    6: 
    7: Micah and the Levite. 1 There was a man from the mountain region of Ephraim whose name was Micah. 2 He said to his mother, “The eleven hundred pieces of silver that were taken from you, about which you pronounced a curse and even said it in my hearing—I have that silver. I took it. So now I will restore it to you.” Then his mother said, “May my son be blessed by the Lord!” 3 When he restored the eleven hundred pieces of silver to his mother, she said, “I consecrate the silver to the Lord from my own hand on behalf of my son to make an idol overlaid with silver.”[b] 4 So when he restored the silver to his mother, she took two hundred pieces and gave them to the silversmith, who made of them an idol overlaid with silver. So it remained in the house of Micah. 5 The man Micah had a shrine, and he made an ephod and teraphim,[c] and installed one of his sons, who became his priest. 6 [d]In those days there was no king in Israel; everyone did what was right in their own eyes.
7 There was a young man from Bethlehem of Judah, from the clan of Judah; he was a Levite residing there. 
    8: The man set out from the city, Bethlehem of Judah, to take up residence wherever he could find a place. On his journey he came into the mountain region of Ephraim as far as the house of Micah. 
    9: Where do you come from?” Micah asked him. He answered him, “I am a Levite, from Bethlehem in Judah, and I am on my way to take up residence wherever I can find a place.” 
    10: “Stay with me,” Micah said to him. “Be father and priest to me, and I will give you ten silver pieces a year, a set of garments, and your living.” He pressed the Levite, 
    11: and he agreed to stay with the man. The young man became like one of his own sons. 
    12: Micah installed the Levite, and the young man became his priest, remaining in the house of Micah. 
    13: Then Micah said, “Now I know that the Lord will prosper me, since I have the Levite as my priest.”


  Chapter 18.

    1: 
Migration of the Danites. 1 In those days there was no king in Israel. In those days the tribe of the Danites were in search of a heritage to dwell in, for up to that time no heritage had been allotted to them among the tribes of Israel.

    2: So the Danites sent from their clans five powerful men of Zorah and Eshtaol, to reconnoiter the land and scout it. “Go, scout the land,” they were told. They went into the mountain region of Ephraim, and they spent the night there. 
    3: While they were near the house of Micah, they recognized the voice of the young Levite, so they turned aside. They asked him, “Who brought you here? What are you doing here? What is your interest here?” 
    4: “This is what Micah has done for me,” he replied to them. “He has hired me and I have become his priest.” 
    5: They said to him, “Consult God, that we may know whether the journey we are making will lead to success.” 
    6: The priest said to them, “Go in peace! The journey you are making is under the eye of the Lord.”

    7: 
    8: Migration of the Danites. 1 In those days there was no king in Israel. In those days the tribe of the Danites were in search of a heritage to dwell in, for up to that time no heritage had been allotted to them among the tribes of Israel.
2 So the Danites sent from their clans five powerful men of Zorah and Eshtaol, to reconnoiter the land and scout it. “Go, scout the land,” they were told. They went into the mountain region of Ephraim, and they spent the night there. 3 While they were near the house of Micah, they recognized the voice[b] of the young Levite, so they turned aside. They asked him, “Who brought you here? What are you doing here? What is your interest here?” 4 “This is what Micah has done for me,” he replied to them. “He has hired me and I have become his priest.” 5 They said to him, “Consult God, that we may know whether the journey we are making will lead to success.” 6 The priest said to them, “Go in peace! The journey you are making is under the eye of the Lord.”
7 So the five men went on and came to Laish. They saw the people there living securely after the manner of the Sidonians, quiet and trusting, with no lack of any natural resource. They were distant from the Sidonians and had no dealings with the Arameans.[c] 8 When the five returned to their kin in Zorah and Eshtaol, they were asked, “What do you have to report?” 
    9: hey replied, “Come, let us attack them, for we have seen the land and it is very good. Are you going to hesitate? Do not be slow to go in and take possession of the land! 
    10: When you go you will come to a trusting people. The land stretches out in both directions, and God has indeed given it into your power—a place where no natural resource is lacking.”

    11: So six hundred of the clan of the Danites, men armed with weapons of war, set out from Zorah and Eshtaol. 
    12: They marched up into Judah and encamped near Kiriath-jearim; for this reason the place is called Mahaneh-dan to this day (it lies west of Kiriath-jearim).

    13: From there they passed on into the mountain region of Ephraim and came to the house of Micah. 
    14: Then the five men who had gone to reconnoiter the land spoke up and said to their kindred, “Do you know that in these houses there are an ephod, teraphim, and an idol overlaid with silver? Now decide what you must do!” 
    15: So turning in that direction, they went to the house of the young Levite at the home of Micah and greeted him. 
    16: The six hundred Danites stationed themselves at the entrance of the gate armed with weapons of war. 
    17: 
    18: Migration of the Danites. 1 In those days there was no king in Israel. In those days the tribe of the Danites were in search of a heritage to dwell in, for up to that time no heritage had been allotted to them among the tribes of Israel.
2 So the Danites sent from their clans five powerful men of Zorah and Eshtaol, to reconnoiter the land and scout it. “Go, scout the land,” they were told. They went into the mountain region of Ephraim, and they spent the night there. 3 While they were near the house of Micah, they recognized the voice[b] of the young Levite, so they turned aside. They asked him, “Who brought you here? What are you doing here? What is your interest here?” 4 “This is what Micah has done for me,” he replied to them. “He has hired me and I have become his priest.” 5 They said to him, “Consult God, that we may know whether the journey we are making will lead to success.” 6 The priest said to them, “Go in peace! The journey you are making is under the eye of the Lord.”
7 So the five men went on and came to Laish. They saw the people there living securely after the manner of the Sidonians, quiet and trusting, with no lack of any natural resource. They were distant from the Sidonians and had no dealings with the Arameans.[c] 8 When the five returned to their kin in Zorah and Eshtaol, they were asked, “What do you have to report?” 9 They replied, “Come, let us attack them, for we have seen the land and it is very good. Are you going to hesitate? Do not be slow to go in and take possession of the land! 10 When you go you will come to a trusting people. The land stretches out in both directions, and God has indeed given it into your power—a place where no natural resource is lacking.”
11 So six hundred of the clan of the Danites, men armed with weapons of war, set out from Zorah and Eshtaol. 12 They marched up into Judah and encamped near Kiriath-jearim; for this reason the place is called Mahaneh-dan[d] to this day (it lies west of Kiriath-jearim).
13 From there they passed on into the mountain region of Ephraim and came to the house of Micah. 14 Then the five men who had gone to reconnoiter the land spoke up and said to their kindred, “Do you know that in these houses there are an ephod, teraphim, and an idol overlaid with silver? Now decide what you must do!” 15 So turning in that direction, they went to the house of the young Levite at the home of Micah and greeted him. 16 The six hundred Danites stationed themselves at the entrance of the gate armed with weapons of war. 17 The five men who had gone to reconnoiter the land went up 18 and entered the house of Micah with the priest standing there. They took the idol, the ephod, the teraphim and the metal image. When the priest said to them, “What are you doing?” 
    19: they said to him, “Be still! Put your hand over your mouth! Come with us and be our father and priest. Is it better for you to be priest for the family of one man or to be priest for a tribe and a clan in Israel?” 
    20: The priest, agreeing, took the ephod, the teraphim, and the idol, and went along with the troops. 
    21: As they turned to depart, they placed their little ones, their livestock, and their goods at the head of the column.

    22: When the Danites had gone some distance from the house of Micah, Micah and the men in the houses nearby mustered and overtook them. 
    23: They called to the Danites, who turned and said to Micah, “What do you want that you have called this muster?” 
    24: “You have taken my god, which I made for myself, and you have gone off with my priest as well,” he answered. “What is left for me? How, then, can you ask me, ‘What do you want?’” 
    25: The Danites said to him, “Do not let your voice be heard near us, or aggravated men will attack you, and you will have forfeited your life and the lives of your family!” 
    26: Then the Danites went on their way, and Micah, seeing that they were too strong for him, turned back and went home.

    27: Having taken what Micah had made and his priest, they marched against Laish, a quiet and trusting people; they put them to the sword and destroyed the city by fire. 
    28: No one came to their aid, since the city was far from Sidon and they had no dealings with the Arameans; the city was in the valley that belongs to Beth-rehob. The Danites then rebuilt the city and occupied it. 
    29: They named it Dan after their ancestor Dan, who was born to Israel. But Laish was the name of the city formerly. 
    30: The Danites set up the idol for themselves, and Jonathan, son of Gershom, son of Moses, and his descendants were priests for the tribe of the Danites until the time the land went into captivity. 
    31: They maintained the idol Micah had made as long as the house of God was in Shiloh.


  Chapter 19.

    1: 
The Levite from Ephraim. 1 In those days, when there was no king in Israel, there was a Levite residing in remote parts of the mountain region of Ephraim who had taken for himself a concubine from Bethlehem of Judah. 
    2: But his concubine spurned him and left him for her father’s house in Bethlehem of Judah, where she stayed for some four months. 
    3: Her husband then set out with his servant and a pair of donkeys, and went after her to soothe her and bring her back. He arrived at her father’s house, and when the young woman’s father saw him, he came out joyfully to meet him. 
    4: His father-in-law, the young woman’s father, urged him to stay, and so he spent three days eating and drinking and passing the night there. 
    5: On the fourth day they rose early in the morning and he prepared to go. But the young woman’s father said to his son-in-law, “Fortify yourself with a little food; you can go later on.” 
    6: So they stayed and the two men ate and drank together. Then the young woman’s father said to the husband, “Why not decide to spend the night here and enjoy yourself?” 
    7: The man made a move to go, but when his father-in-law pressed him he went back and spent the night there.

    8: 
    9: he Levite from Ephraim. 1 In those days, when there was no king in Israel, there was a Levite residing in remote parts of the mountain region of Ephraim who had taken for himself a concubine from Bethlehem of Judah. 2 But his concubine spurned him and left him for her father’s house in Bethlehem of Judah, where she stayed for some four months. 3 Her husband then set out with his servant and a pair of donkeys, and went after her to soothe her and bring her back. He arrived at her father’s house, and when the young woman’s father saw him, he came out joyfully to meet him. 4 His father-in-law, the young woman’s father, urged him to stay, and so he spent three days eating and drinking and passing the night there. 5 On the fourth day they rose early in the morning and he prepared to go. But the young woman’s father said to his son-in-law, “Fortify yourself with a little food; you can go later on.” 6 So they stayed and the two men ate and drank together. Then the young woman’s father said to the husband, “Why not decide to spend the night here and enjoy yourself?” 7 The man made a move to go, but when his father-in-law pressed him he went back and spent the night there.
8 On the fifth morning he rose early to depart, but the young woman’s father said, “Fortify yourself!” He coaxed him, and he tarried until the afternoon, and the two of them ate. 9 Then when the husband was ready to go with his concubine and servant, the young woman’s father said to him, “See, the day is wearing on toward evening. Stay for the night. See, the day is coming to an end. Spend the night here and enjoy yourself. Early tomorrow you can start your journey home.” 
    10: The man, however, refused to stay another night; he and his concubine set out with a pair of saddled donkeys, and traveled until they came opposite Jebus, which is Jerusalem. 
    11: Since they were near Jebus with the day far gone, the servant said to his master, “Come, let us turn off to this city of the Jebusites and spend the night in it.” 
    12: But his master said to him, “We will not turn off to a foreigner’s city, where there are no Israelites. We will go on to Gibeah. 
    13: Come,” he said to his servant, “let us make for some other place and spend the night in either Gibeah or Ramah.” 
    14: So they continued on their way until the sun set on them when they were opposite Gibeah of Benjamin.

    15: There they turned off to enter Gibeah for the night. The man went in and sat down in the town square, but no one took them inside to spend the night. 
    16: In the evening, however, an old man came from his work in the field; he was from the mountain region of Ephraim, though he was living in Gibeah where the local people were Benjaminites. 
    17: When he noticed the traveler in the town square, the old man asked, “Where are you going, and where have you come from?” 
    18: 
    19: The Levite from Ephraim. 1 In those days, when there was no king in Israel, there was a Levite residing in remote parts of the mountain region of Ephraim who had taken for himself a concubine from Bethlehem of Judah. 2 But his concubine spurned him and left him for her father’s house in Bethlehem of Judah, where she stayed for some four months. 3 Her husband then set out with his servant and a pair of donkeys, and went after her to soothe her and bring her back. He arrived at her father’s house, and when the young woman’s father saw him, he came out joyfully to meet him. 4 His father-in-law, the young woman’s father, urged him to stay, and so he spent three days eating and drinking and passing the night there. 5 On the fourth day they rose early in the morning and he prepared to go. But the young woman’s father said to his son-in-law, “Fortify yourself with a little food; you can go later on.” 6 So they stayed and the two men ate and drank together. Then the young woman’s father said to the husband, “Why not decide to spend the night here and enjoy yourself?” 7 The man made a move to go, but when his father-in-law pressed him he went back and spent the night there.
8 On the fifth morning he rose early to depart, but the young woman’s father said, “Fortify yourself!” He coaxed him, and he tarried until the afternoon, and the two of them ate. 9 Then when the husband was ready to go with his concubine and servant, the young woman’s father said to him, “See, the day is wearing on toward evening. Stay for the night. See, the day is coming to an end. Spend the night here and enjoy yourself. Early tomorrow you can start your journey home.” 10 The man, however, refused to stay another night; he and his concubine set out with a pair of saddled donkeys, and traveled until they came opposite Jebus, which is Jerusalem. 11 Since they were near Jebus with the day far gone, the servant said to his master, “Come, let us turn off to this city of the Jebusites and spend the night in it.” 12 But his master said to him, “We will not turn off to a foreigner’s city, where there are no Israelites. We will go on to Gibeah. 13 Come,” he said to his servant, “let us make for some other place and spend the night in either Gibeah or Ramah.” 14 So they continued on their way until the sun set on them when they were opposite Gibeah of Benjamin.
15 [b]There they turned off to enter Gibeah for the night. The man went in and sat down in the town square, but no one took them inside to spend the night. 16 In the evening, however, an old man came from his work in the field; he was from the mountain region of Ephraim, though he was living in Gibeah where the local people were Benjaminites. 17 When he noticed the traveler in the town square, the old man asked, “Where are you going, and where have you come from?” 18 He said to him, “We are traveling from Bethlehem of Judah far up into the mountain region of Ephraim, where I am from. I have been to Bethlehem of Judah, and now I am going home; but no one has taken me into his house. 19 We have straw and fodder for our donkeys, and bread and wine for myself and for your maidservant and the young man who is with your servant; there is nothing else we need.” 
    20: “Rest assured,” the old man said to him, “I will provide for all your needs, but do not spend the night in the public square.” 
    21: So he led them to his house and mixed fodder for the donkeys. Then they washed their feet, and ate and drank.
The Outrage at Gibeah. 
    22: While they were enjoying themselves, the men of the city, a bunch of scoundrels, surrounded the house and beat on the door. They said to the old man who was the owner of the house, “Bring out the man who has come into your house, so that we may get intimate with him.” 
    23: The man who was the owner of the house went out to them and said, “No, my brothers; do not be so wicked. This man has come into my house; do not commit this terrible crime. 
    24: Instead, let me bring out my virgin daughter and this man’s concubine. Humiliate them, or do whatever you want; but against him do not commit such a terrible crime.” 
    25: But the men would not listen to him. So the man seized his concubine and thrust her outside to them. They raped her and abused her all night until morning, and let her go as the sun was coming up. 
    26: At the approach of morning the woman came and collapsed at the entrance of the house in which her husband was, and lay there until morning. 
    27: When her husband rose in the morning and opened the door of the house to start out again on his journey, there was the woman, his concubine, collapsed at the entrance of the house with her hands on the threshold. 
    28: “Come, let us go,” he said to her, but there was no answer. So the man placed her on a donkey and started out again for home.

    29: On reaching home, he got a knife and took hold of the body of his concubine. He cut her up limb by limb into twelve pieces and sent them throughout the territory of Israel. 
    30: He instructed the men whom he sent, “Thus you shall say to all the men of Israel: ‘Has such a thing ever happened from the day the Israelites came up from the land of Egypt to this day? Take note of it; form a plan and give orders.’”


  Chapter 20.

    1: 
    2: 
Assembly of Israelites. 1 So all the Israelites came out as one, from Dan to Beer-sheba including the land of Gilead, and the assembly gathered to the Lord at Mizpah. 2 The leaders of all the people, all the staff-bearers of Israel,[b] presented themselves in the assembly of the people of God—four hundred thousand foot soldiers who carried swords. 
    3: Meanwhile, the Benjaminites heard that the Israelites had gone up to Mizpah. The Israelites asked, “How did this evil thing happen?” 
    4: and the Levite, the husband of the murdered woman, testified: “It was at Gibeah of Benjamin, which my concubine and I had entered for the night. 
    5: The lords of Gibeah rose up against me and surrounded me in the house at night. I was the one they intended to kill, but they abused my concubine and she died. 
    6: So I took my concubine and cut her up and sent her through every part of the territory of Israel, because of the terrible thing they had done in Israel. 
    7: So now, all you Israelites, give your judgment and counsel in this matter.” 
    8: All the people rose as one to say, “None of us will leave for our tents or return to our homes. 
    9: ow as for Gibeah, this is what we will do: We will go up against it by lot, 
    10: taking from all the tribes of Israel ten men for every hundred, a hundred for every thousand, a thousand for every ten thousand, and procuring supplies for the soldiers who will go to exact from Gibeah of Benjamin the full measure of the terrible thing it committed in Israel.”

    11: So all the men of Israel gathered against the city, united as one. 
    12: The tribes of Israel sent men throughout the tribe of Benjamin to say, “What is this evil that has occurred among you? 
    13: Now give up the men, the scoundrels who are in Gibeah, that we may put them to death and thus purge the evil from Israel.” But the Benjaminites refused to listen to their kindred, the Israelites. 
    14: Instead, the Benjaminites assembled from their cities at Gibeah, to march out to battle with the Israelites. 
    15: On that day the Benjaminites mustered from their cities twenty-six thousand swordsmen, in addition to the inhabitants of Gibeah, who mustered seven hundred picked men 
    16: who were left-handed, every one of them able to sling a stone at a hair without missing. 
    17: The men of Israel, without Benjamin, mustered four hundred thousand swordsmen, all of them warriors. 
    18: They went up to Bethel and consulted God. When the Israelites asked, “Who shall go up first for us to do battle with the Benjaminites?” the Lord said: Judah first. 
    19: 
    20: Assembly of Israelites. 1 So all the Israelites came out as one, from Dan to Beer-sheba including the land of Gilead, and the assembly gathered to the Lord at Mizpah. 2 The leaders of all the people, all the staff-bearers of Israel,[b] presented themselves in the assembly of the people of God—four hundred thousand foot soldiers who carried swords. 3 Meanwhile, the Benjaminites heard that the Israelites had gone up to Mizpah. The Israelites asked, “How did this evil thing happen?” 4 and the Levite, the husband of the murdered woman, testified: “It was at Gibeah of Benjamin, which my concubine and I had entered for the night. 5 The lords of Gibeah rose up against me and surrounded me in the house at night. I was the one they intended to kill, but they abused my concubine and she died. 6 So I took my concubine and cut her up and sent her through every part of the territory of Israel, because of the terrible thing they had done in Israel. 7 So now, all you Israelites, give your judgment and counsel in this matter.” 8 All the people rose as one to say, “None of us will leave for our tents or return to our homes. 9 Now as for Gibeah, this is what we will do: We will go up against it by lot, 10 taking from all the tribes of Israel ten men for every hundred, a hundred for every thousand, a thousand for every ten thousand, and procuring supplies for the soldiers who will go to exact from Gibeah of Benjamin the full measure of the terrible thing it committed in Israel.”
11 So all the men of Israel gathered against the city, united as one. 12 The tribes of Israel sent men throughout the tribe of Benjamin to say, “What is this evil that has occurred among you? 13 Now give up the men, the scoundrels who are in Gibeah, that we may put them to death and thus purge the evil from Israel.” But the Benjaminites refused to listen to their kindred, the Israelites. 14 Instead, the Benjaminites assembled from their cities at Gibeah, to march out to battle with the Israelites. 15 On that day the Benjaminites mustered from their cities twenty-six thousand swordsmen, in addition to the inhabitants of Gibeah, who mustered seven hundred picked men 16 [c]who were left-handed, every one of them able to sling a stone at a hair without missing. 17 The men of Israel, without Benjamin, mustered four hundred thousand swordsmen, all of them warriors. 18 They went up to Bethel and consulted God. When the Israelites asked, “Who shall go up first for us to do battle with the Benjaminites?” the Lord said: Judah first.[d] 19 [e]The Israelites rose in the morning and encamped against Gibeah.
War with Benjamin. 20 The men of Israel marched out to do battle with Benjamin and drew up in battle array against them at Gibeah. 
    21: The Benjaminites marched out of Gibeah that day and felled twenty-two thousand men of Israel. 
    22: But the army of the men of Israel took courage and again drew up for battle in the place where they had drawn up on the previous day. 
    23: Then the Israelites went up and wept before the Lord until evening. “Shall I again engage my brother Benjamin in battle?” they asked the Lord; and the Lord answered: Attack! 
    24: When the Israelites drew near to the Benjaminites on the second day, 
    25: Benjamin marched out of Gibeah against them again and felled eighteen thousand Israelites, all of them swordsmen. 
    26: So the entire Israelite army went up and entered Bethel, where they sat weeping before the Lord. They fasted that day until evening and presented burnt offerings and communion offerings before the Lord. 
    27: The Israelites consulted the Lord (for the ark of the covenant of the Lord was there in those days, 
    28: and Phinehas, son of Eleazar, son of Aaron, was standing in his presence in those days), and asked, “Shall I again go out to battle with my brother Benjamin, or shall I stop?” The Lord said: Attack! For tomorrow I will deliver him into your power. 
    29: So Israel set men in ambush around Gibeah.

    30: When the Israelites went up against the Benjaminites on the third day, they drew up against Gibeah as on other occasions. 
    31: When the Benjaminites marched out to meet the army, they began, as on other occasions, to strike down some of the troops along the highways, one of which goes up to Bethel and one to Gibeah in the open country; about thirty Israelites were slain. 
    32: The Benjaminites thought, “They are routed before us as previously.” The Israelites, however, were thinking, “We will flee and draw them out from the city onto the highways.” 
    33: And then all the men of Israel rose from their places, forming up at Baal-tamar, and the Israelites in ambush rushed from their place west of Gibeah 
    34: and advanced against Gibeah with ten thousand picked men from all Israel. The fighting was severe, but no one knew that a disaster was closing in. 
    35: The Lord defeated Benjamin before Israel; and on that day the Israelites killed twenty-five thousand one hundred men of Benjamin, all of them swordsmen.

    36: Then the Benjaminites saw that they were defeated. The men of Israel gave ground to Benjamin, trusting in the ambush they had set at Gibeah. 
    37: Then the men in ambush, having made a sudden dash against Gibeah, marched in and put the whole city to the sword. 
    38: The arrangement the men of Israel had with the men in ambush was that they would send up a smoke signal from the city, 
    39: and the men of Israel would then wheel about in the battle. Benjamin, having begun by killing off some thirty of the men of Israel, thought, “Surely they are completely routed before us, as in the earlier fighting.” 
    40: But when the signal, the column of smoke, began to rise up from the city, Benjamin looked back and there was the whole city going up in smoke toward heaven. 
    41: Then when the men of Israel wheeled about, the men of Benjamin were thrown into confusion, for they realized that disaster was closing in on them. 
    42: They retreated before the men of Israel in the direction of the wilderness, but the fighting kept pace with them, and those who had been in the city were spreading destruction in between. 
    43: They surrounded the men of Benjamin, pursued them from Nohah and drove them along to a point east of Gibeah. 
    44: Eighteen thousand from Benjamin fell, all of them warriors. 
    45: They turned and fled into the wilderness to the crag of Rimmon. The Israelites picked off five thousand men on the highways and kept pace with them as far as Gidom, where they struck down another two thousand of them. 
    46: The total of those from Benjamin who fell that day was twenty-five thousand swordsmen, all of them warriors. 
    47: Six hundred men turned and fled into the wilderness to the crag of Rimmon, where they remained for four months.

    48: Then the men of Israel turned back against the Benjaminites, putting them to the sword—the inhabitants of the cities, the livestock, and all they came upon. Moreover they destroyed by fire all the cities they came upon.


End of day 59.