Day 57:

Reading Judges, chapters ['9', '10', '11', '12']:

  Chapter 9.

    1: Abimelech, son of Jerubbaal, went to his mother’s kin in Shechem, and said to them and to the whole clan to which his mother’s family belonged, 
    2: “Put this question to all the lords of Shechem: ‘Which is better for you: that seventy men, all Jerubbaal’s sons, rule over you, or that one man rule over you?’ You must remember that I am your own flesh and bone.” 
    3: When his mother’s kin repeated these words on his behalf to all the lords of Shechem, they set their hearts on Abimelech, thinking, “He is our kin.” 
    4: They also gave him seventy pieces of silver from the temple of Baal-berith, with which Abimelech hired worthless men and outlaws as his followers. 
    5: He then went to his father’s house in Ophrah, and killed his brothers, the seventy sons of Jerubbaal, on one stone. Only the youngest son of Jerubbaal, Jotham, escaped, for he was hidden. 
    6: Then all the lords of Shechem and all Beth-millo came together and made Abimelech king by the terebinth at the memorial pillar in Shechem.

    7: When this was reported to Jotham, he went and stood at the top of Mount Gerizim and cried out in a loud voice:
“Hear me, lords of Shechem,
    and may God hear you!

    8: 
    9:  Abimelech, son of Jerubbaal, went to his mother’s kin in Shechem, and said to them and to the whole clan to which his mother’s family belonged, 2 “Put this question to all the lords of Shechem: ‘Which is better for you: that seventy men, all Jerubbaal’s sons, rule over you, or that one man rule over you?’ You must remember that I am your own flesh and bone.” 3 When his mother’s kin repeated these words on his behalf to all the lords of Shechem, they set their hearts on Abimelech, thinking, “He is our kin.” 4 They also gave him seventy pieces of silver from the temple of Baal-berith, with which Abimelech hired worthless men and outlaws as his followers. 5 He then went to his father’s house in Ophrah, and killed his brothers, the seventy sons of Jerubbaal, on one stone. Only the youngest son of Jerubbaal, Jotham, escaped, for he was hidden. 6 Then all the lords of Shechem and all Beth-millo came together and made Abimelech king by the terebinth at the memorial pillar in Shechem.
7 When this was reported to Jotham, he went and stood at the top of Mount Gerizim and cried out in a loud voice:
“Hear me, lords of Shechem,
    and may God hear you!
8 
One day the trees went out
    to anoint a king over themselves.
So they said to the olive tree,
    ‘Reign over us.’
9 
But the olive tree answered them,
    ‘Must I give up my rich oil,
    whereby gods and human beings are honored,
    and go off to hold sway over the trees?’

    10: 
Then the trees said to the fig tree,
    ‘Come; you reign over us!’

    11: 
But the fig tree answered them,
    ‘Must I give up my sweetness
    and my sweet fruit,
    and go off to hold sway over the trees?’

    12: 
Then the trees said to the vine,
    ‘Come you, reign over us.’

    13: 
But the vine answered them,
    ‘Must I give up my wine
    that cheers gods and human beings,
    and go off to hold sway over the trees?’

    14: 
Then all the trees said to the buckthorn,
    ‘Come; you reign over us!’

    15: 
The buckthorn answered the trees,
    ‘If you are anointing me in good faith,
    to make me king over you,
    come, and take refuge in my shadow.
    But if not, let fire come from the buckthorn
    and devour the cedars of Lebanon.’

    16: “Now then, if you have acted in good faith and integrity in appointing Abimelech your king, if you have acted with good will toward Jerubbaal and his house, and if you have treated him as he deserved— 
    17: for my father fought for you at the risk of his life when he delivered you from the power of Midian, 
    18: but you have risen against my father’s house today and killed his seventy sons upon one stone and made Abimelech, the son of his maidservant, king over the lords of Shechem, because he is your kin— 
    19: if, then, you have acted in good faith and integrity toward Jerubbaal and his house today, then rejoice in Abimelech and may he in turn rejoice in you! 
    20: But if not, let fire come forth from Abimelech and devour the lords of Shechem and Beth-millo, and let fire come forth from the lords of Shechem and Beth-millo and devour Abimelech.” 
    21: Then Jotham fled and escaped to Beer, where he remained for fear of his brother Abimelech.

    22: When Abimelech had ruled Israel for three years, 
    23: God put an evil spirit between Abimelech and the lords of Shechem, and the lords of Shechem broke faith with the house of Abimelech. 
    24: This was to repay the violence done to the seventy sons of Jerubbaal and to avenge their blood upon their brother Abimelech, who killed them, and upon the lords of Shechem, who encouraged him to kill his brothers. 
    25: The lords of Shechem then set men in ambush for him on the mountaintops, and they robbed all who passed them on the road. It was reported to Abimelech.

    26: Now Gaal, son of Ebed, and his kin came, and when they passed through Shechem, the lords of Shechem put their trust in him. 
    27: They went out into the fields, harvested the grapes from their vineyards, trod them out, and held a festival. Then they went to the temple of their god, where they ate and drank and cursed Abimelech. 
    28: Gaal, son of Ebed, said, “Who is Abimelech? And who is Shechem that we should serve him? Did not the son of Jerubbaal and his lieutenant Zebul serve the men of Hamor, father of Shechem? So why should we serve him? 
    29: Would that these troops were entrusted to my command! I would depose Abimelech. I would say to Abimelech, ‘Get a larger army and come out!’”

    30: When Zebul, the ruler of the city, heard what Gaal, son of Ebed, had said, he was angry 
    31: and sent messengers to Abimelech in Arumah to say, “Gaal, son of Ebed, and his kin have come to Shechem and are stirring up the city against you. 
    32: So take action tonight, you and the troops who are with you, and set an ambush in the fields. 
    33: Promptly at sunrise tomorrow morning, make a raid on the city. When he and the troops who are with him come out against you, deal with him as best you can.”

    34: During the night Abimelech went into action with all his soldiers and set up an ambush outside of Shechem in four companies. 
    35: Gaal, son of Ebed, went out and stood at the entrance of the city gate. When Abimelech and his soldiers rose from their place of ambush, 
    36: Gaal saw the soldiers and said to Zebul, “There are soldiers coming down from the mountaintops!” But Zebul answered him, “It is the shadow of the hills that you see as men.” 
    37: But Gaal went on to say, “Soldiers are coming down from the region of Tabbur-haarez, and one company is coming by way of Elon-meonenim.” 
    38: Zebul said to him, “Where now is your boast, when you said, ‘Who is Abimelech that we should serve him?’ Are these not the troops for whom you expressed contempt? Go out now and fight with them.” 
    39: So Gaal went out at the head of the lords of Shechem to fight against Abimelech; 
    40: but when Abimelech went after him, he fled from him. Many fell slain right up to the entrance of the gate. 
    41: Abimelech returned to Arumah, and Zebul drove Gaal and his kin away so that they could no longer remain at Shechem.

    42: The next day, the army marched out into the field, and it was reported to Abimelech. 
    43: He divided the troops he had into three companies, and set up an ambush in the fields. He watched until he saw the army leave the city and then went on the attack against them. 
    44: Abimelech and the company with him rushed in and stood by the entrance of the city gate, while the other two companies rushed upon all who were in the field and attacked them. 
    45: That entire day Abimelech fought against the city. He captured it, killed the people who were in it, and demolished the city itself, sowing it with salt.

    46: When they heard of this, all the lords of the Migdal-shechem went into the crypt of the temple of El-berith. 
    47: It was reported to Abimelech that all the lords of the Migdal-shechem were gathered together. 
    48: So he went up Mount Zalmon with all his soldiers, took his ax in his hand, and cut down some brushwood. This he lifted to his shoulder, then said to the troops with him, “Hurry! Do just as you have seen me do.” 
    49: So all the soldiers likewise cut down brushwood and, following Abimelech, placed it against the crypt. Then they set the crypt on fire over them, so that every one of the people of the Migdal-shechem, about a thousand men and women, perished.

    50: Abimelech proceeded to Thebez, encamped, and captured it. 
    51: Now there was a strong tower in the middle of the city, and all the men and women and all the lords of the city fled there, shutting themselves in and going up to the roof of the tower. 
    52: Abimelech came up to the tower and fought against it. When he came close to the entrance of the tower to set it on fire, 
    53: a certain woman cast the upper part of a millstone down on Abimelech’s head, and it fractured his skull. 
    54: He immediately called his armor-bearer and said to him, “Draw your sword and put me to death so they will not say about me, ‘A woman killed him.’” So his attendant ran him through and he died. 
    55: When the Israelites saw that Abimelech was dead, they all left for their homes.

    56: Thus did God repay the evil that Abimelech had done to his father in killing his seventy brothers. 
    57: God also brought all the wickedness of the people of Shechem back on their heads, for the curse of Jotham, son of Jerubbaal, overtook them.


  Chapter 10.

    1: 
Tola. 1 After Abimelech, Tola, son of Puah, son of Dodo, a man of Issachar, rose up to save Israel; he lived in Shamir in the mountain region of Ephraim. 
    2: When he had judged Israel twenty-three years, he died and was buried in Shamir.
Jair. 
    3: Jair the Gileadite came after him and judged Israel twenty-two years. 
    4: He had thirty sons who rode on thirty donkeys and possessed thirty cities in the land of Gilead (these are called Havvoth-jair to the present day). 
    5: Jair died and was buried in Kamon.
Oppression by the Ammonites. 
    6: The Israelites again did what was evil in the sight of the Lord, serving the Baals and Ashtarts, the gods of Aram, the gods of Sidon, the gods of Moab, the gods of the Ammonites, and the gods of the Philistines. Since they had abandoned the Lord and would not serve him, 
    7: the Lord became angry with Israel and he sold them into the power of the Philistines and the Ammonites. 
    8: For eighteen years they afflicted and oppressed the Israelites in Bashan, and all the Israelites in the Amorite land beyond the Jordan in Gilead. 
    9: 
    10: Tola. 1 After Abimelech, Tola, son of Puah, son of Dodo, a man of Issachar, rose up to save Israel; he lived in Shamir in the mountain region of Ephraim. 2 When he had judged Israel twenty-three years, he died and was buried in Shamir.
Jair. 3 Jair the Gileadite came after him and judged Israel twenty-two years. 4 He had thirty sons who rode on thirty donkeys[b] and possessed thirty cities in the land of Gilead (these are called Havvoth-jair to the present day). 5 Jair died and was buried in Kamon.
Oppression by the Ammonites. 6 The Israelites again did what was evil in the sight of the Lord, serving the Baals and Ashtarts, the gods of Aram, the gods of Sidon, the gods of Moab, the gods of the Ammonites, and the gods of the Philistines. Since they had abandoned the Lord and would not serve him, 7 the Lord became angry with Israel and he sold them into the power of the Philistines and the Ammonites. 8 For eighteen years they afflicted and oppressed the Israelites in Bashan, and all the Israelites in the Amorite land beyond the Jordan in Gilead. 9 The Ammonites also crossed the Jordan to fight against Judah, Benjamin and the house of Ephraim, so that Israel was in great distress.
10 Then the Israelites cried out to the Lord, “We have sinned against you, for we have abandoned our God and served the Baals.” 
    11: The Lord answered the Israelites: Did not the Egyptians, the Amorites, the Ammonites, the Philistines, 
    12: the Sidonians, the Amalekites, and the Midianites oppress you? Yet when you cried out to me, and I saved you from their power, 
    13: you still abandoned me and served other gods. Therefore I will save you no more. 
    14: Go and cry out to the gods you have chosen; let them save you in your time of distress. 
    15: But the Israelites said to the Lord, “We have sinned. Do to us whatever is good in your sight. Only deliver us this day!” 
    16: And they cast out the foreign gods from their midst and served the Lord, so that he grieved over the misery of Israel.

    17: The Ammonites were called out for war and encamped in Gilead, while the Israelites assembled and encamped at Mizpah. 
    18: The captains of the army of Gilead said to one another, “The one who begins the war against the Ammonites shall be leader of all the inhabitants of Gilead.”


  Chapter 11.

    1: 
Jephthah. 1 Jephthah the Gileadite was a warrior. He was the son of a prostitute, fathered by Gilead. 
    2: Gilead’s wife had also borne him sons. When they grew up the sons of the wife had driven Jephthah away, saying to him, “You shall inherit nothing in our father’s house, for you are the son of another woman.” 
    3: So Jephthah had fled from his brothers and taken up residence in the land of Tob. Worthless men had joined company with him, and went out with him on raids.

    4: Some time later, the Ammonites went to war with Israel. 
    5: As soon as the Ammonites were at war with Israel, the elders of Gilead went to bring Jephthah from the land of Tob. 
    6: “Come,” they said to Jephthah, “be our commander so that we can fight the Ammonites.” 
    7: “Are you not the ones who hated me and drove me from my father’s house?” Jephthah replied to the elders of Gilead, “Why do you come to me now, when you are in distress?” 
    8: The elders of Gilead said to Jephthah, “This is the reason we have come back to you now: if you go with us to fight against the Ammonites, you shall be the leader of all of the inhabitants of Gilead.” 
    9: ephthah answered the elders of Gilead, “If you bring me back to fight against the Ammonites and the Lord delivers them up to me, I will be your leader.” 
    10: 
    11: Jephthah. 1 Jephthah the Gileadite was a warrior. He was the son of a prostitute, fathered by Gilead. 2 Gilead’s wife had also borne him sons. When they grew up the sons of the wife had driven Jephthah away, saying to him, “You shall inherit nothing in our father’s house, for you are the son of another woman.” 3 So Jephthah had fled from his brothers and taken up residence in the land of Tob. Worthless men had joined company with him, and went out with him on raids.
4 Some time later, the Ammonites went to war with Israel. 5 As soon as the Ammonites were at war with Israel, the elders of Gilead went to bring Jephthah from the land of Tob. 6 “Come,” they said to Jephthah, “be our commander so that we can fight the Ammonites.” 7 “Are you not the ones who hated me and drove me from my father’s house?” Jephthah replied to the elders of Gilead, “Why do you come to me now, when you are in distress?” 8 The elders of Gilead said to Jephthah, “This is the reason we have come back to you now: if you go with us to fight against the Ammonites, you shall be the leader of all of the inhabitants of Gilead.” 9 Jephthah answered the elders of Gilead, “If you bring me back to fight against the Ammonites and the Lord delivers them up to me, I will be your leader.” 10 The elders of Gilead said to Jephthah, “The Lord is witness between us that we will do as you say.” 11 So Jephthah went with the elders of Gilead, and the army made him their leader and commander. Jephthah gave all his orders in the presence of the Lord in Mizpah.

    12: Then he sent messengers to the king of the Ammonites to say, “What do you have against me that you come to fight with me in my land?” 
    13: The king of the Ammonites answered the messengers of Jephthah, “Israel took away my land from the Arnon to the Jabbok and the Jordan when they came up from Egypt. Now restore it peaceably.”

    14: Again Jephthah sent messengers to the king of the Ammonites, 
    15: saying to him, “This is what Jephthah says: ‘Israel did not take the land of Moab or the land of the Ammonites. 
    16: For when they came up from Egypt, Israel went through the wilderness to the Red Sea and came to Kadesh. 
    17: Israel then sent messengers to the king of Edom saying, “Let me pass through your land.” But the king of Edom did not give consent. They also sent to the king of Moab, but he too was unwilling. So Israel remained in Kadesh. 
    18: Then they went through the wilderness, and bypassing the land of Edom and the land of Moab, they arrived east of the land of Moab and encamped across the Arnon. Thus they did not enter the territory of Moab, for the Arnon is the boundary of Moab. 
    19: Then Israel sent messengers to the Amorite king Sihon, who was king of Heshbon. Israel said to him, “Let me pass through your land to my own place.” 
    20: But Sihon refused to let Israel pass through his territory. He gathered all his soldiers, and they encamped at Jahaz and fought Israel. 
    21: But the Lord, the God of Israel, delivered Sihon and his entire army into the power of Israel, who defeated them and occupied all the land of the Amorites who lived in that region. 
    22: They occupied all of the Amorite territory from the Arnon to the Jabbok and the wilderness to the Jordan. 
    23: Now, then, it was the Lord, the God of Israel, who dispossessed the Amorites for his people, Israel. And you are going to dispossess them? 
    24: Should you not take possession of that which your god Chemosh gave you to possess, and should we not take possession of all that the Lord, our God, has dispossessed for us? 
    25: Now, then, are you any better than Balak, son of Zippor, king of Moab? Did he ever quarrel with Israel or make war against them? 
    26: Israel has dwelt in Heshbon and its villages, Aroer and its villages, and all the cities on the banks of the Arnon for three hundred years. Why did you not recover them during that time? 
    27: As for me, I have not sinned against you, but you wrong me by making war against me. Let the Lord, who is judge, decide this day between the Israelites and the Ammonites!’” 
    28: But the king of the Ammonites paid no heed to the message Jephthah sent him.
Jephthah’s Vow. 
    29: The spirit of the Lord came upon Jephthah. He passed through Gilead and Manasseh, and through Mizpah of Gilead as well, and from Mizpah of Gilead he crossed over against the Ammonites. 
    30: Jephthah made a vow to the Lord. “If you deliver the Ammonites into my power,” he said, 
    31: “whoever comes out of the doors of my house to meet me when I return from the Ammonites in peace shall belong to the Lord. I shall offer him up as a burnt offering.”

    32: Jephthah then crossed over against the Ammonites to fight against them, and the Lord delivered them into his power. 
    33: He inflicted a very severe defeat on them from Aroer to the approach of Minnith—twenty cities in all—and as far as Abel-keramin. So the Ammonites were brought into subjection by the Israelites. 
    34: When Jephthah returned to his house in Mizpah, it was his daughter who came out to meet him, with tambourine-playing and dancing. She was his only child: he had neither son nor daughter besides her. 
    35: When he saw her, he tore his garments and said, “Ah, my daughter! You have struck me down and brought calamity upon me. For I have made a vow to the Lord and I cannot take it back.” 
    36: “Father,” she replied, “you have made a vow to the Lord. Do with me as you have vowed, because the Lord has taken vengeance for you against your enemies the Ammonites.” 
    37: Then she said to her father, “Let me have this favor. Do nothing for two months, that I and my companions may go wander in the mountains to weep for my virginity.” 
    38: “Go,” he replied, and sent her away for two months. So she departed with her companions and wept for her virginity in the mountains. 
    39: At the end of the two months she returned to her father, and he did to her as he had vowed. She had not had relations with any man.
It became a custom in Israel 
    40: for Israelite women to go yearly to mourn the daughter of Jephthah the Gileadite for four days of the year.


  Chapter 12.

    1: 
    2: The Shibboleth Incident. 1 The men of Ephraim were called out, and they crossed over to Zaphon. They said to Jephthah, “Why did you go to fight with the Ammonites without calling us to go with you? We will burn your house on top of you.” 2 Jephthah answered them, “My soldiers and I were engaged in a contest with the Ammonites. They were pressing us hard, and I cried out to you, but you did not come to save me from their power. 
    3: When I saw that you were not coming to save me, I took my life in my own hand and crossed over against the Ammonites, and the Lord delivered them into my power. Why, then, should you come up against me this day to fight with me?”

    4: Then Jephthah gathered together all the men of Gilead and fought against Ephraim. The men of Gilead defeated Ephraim, 
    5: and Gilead seized the fords of the Jordan against Ephraim. When any of the fleeing Ephraimites said, “Let me pass,” the men of Gilead would say to him, “Are you an Ephraimite?” If he answered, “No!” 
    6: they would ask him to say “Shibboleth.” If he said “Sibboleth,” not pronouncing it exactly right, they would seize him and kill him at the fords of the Jordan. Forty-two thousand Ephraimites fell at that time.

    7: Jephthah judged Israel for six years, and Jephthah the Gileadite died and was buried in his city in Gilead.
Ibzan. 
    8: After him Ibzan of Bethlehem judged Israel. 
    9: e had thirty sons and thirty daughters whom he gave in marriage outside the family, while bringing in thirty wives for his sons from outside the family. He judged Israel for seven years. 
    10: Ibzan died and was buried in Bethlehem.
Elon. 
    11: 
    12: The Shibboleth Incident. 1 The men of Ephraim were called out, and they crossed over to Zaphon. They said to Jephthah, “Why did you go to fight with the Ammonites without calling us to go with you? We will burn your house on top of you.” 2 Jephthah answered them, “My soldiers and I were engaged in a contest with the Ammonites. They were pressing us hard, and I cried out to you, but you did not come to save me from their power. 3 When I saw that you were not coming to save me, I took my life in my own hand and crossed over against the Ammonites, and the Lord delivered them into my power. Why, then, should you come up against me this day to fight with me?”
4 Then Jephthah gathered together all the men of Gilead and fought against Ephraim. The men of Gilead defeated Ephraim, 5 and Gilead seized the fords of the Jordan against Ephraim. When any of the fleeing Ephraimites said, “Let me pass,” the men of Gilead would say to him, “Are you an Ephraimite?” If he answered, “No!” 6 they would ask him to say “Shibboleth.” If he said “Sibboleth,” not pronouncing it exactly right, they would seize him and kill him at the fords of the Jordan. Forty-two thousand Ephraimites fell at that time.
7 Jephthah judged Israel for six years, and Jephthah the Gileadite died and was buried in his city in Gilead.
Ibzan. 8 After him Ibzan[b] of Bethlehem judged Israel. 9 He had thirty sons and thirty daughters whom he gave in marriage outside the family, while bringing in thirty wives for his sons from outside the family. He judged Israel for seven years. 10 Ibzan died and was buried in Bethlehem.
Elon. 11 After him Elon the Zebulunite judged Israel; he judged Israel for ten years. 12 Elon the Zebulunite died and was buried at Aijalon in the land of Zebulun.
Abdon. 
    13: After him Abdon, son of Hillel, the Pirathonite, judged Israel. 
    14: He had forty sons and thirty grandsons, who rode on seventy donkeys. He judged Israel for eight years. 
    15: Abdon, son of Hillel, the Pirathonite, died and was buried in Pirathon in the land of Ephraim in the mountain region of the Amalekites.


End of day 57.