Day 328:

Reading Ephesians, chapters ['5', '6']:

  Chapter 5.

    1: So be imitators of God, as beloved children, 
    2: and live in love, as Christ loved us and handed himself over for us as a sacrificial offering to God for a fragrant aroma. 
    3: Immorality or any impurity or greed must not even be mentioned among you, as is fitting among holy ones, 
    4: 
    5: 1 So be imitators of God, as beloved children, 2 and live in love, as Christ loved us and handed himself over for us as a sacrificial offering to God for a fragrant aroma. 3 Immorality or any impurity or greed must not even be mentioned among you, as is fitting among holy ones, 4 no obscenity or silly or suggestive talk, which is out of place, but instead, thanksgiving. 5 Be sure of this, that no immoral or impure or greedy person, that is, an idolater, has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God.
Duty to Live in the Light. 
    6: Let no one deceive you with empty arguments, for because of these things the wrath of God is coming upon the disobedient. 
    7: So do not be associated with them. 
    8: For you were once darkness, but now you are light in the Lord. Live as children of light, 
    9: or light produces every kind of goodness and righteousness and truth. 
    10: Try to learn what is pleasing to the Lord. 
    11: Take no part in the fruitless works of darkness; rather expose them, 
    12: for it is shameful even to mention the things done by them in secret; 
    13: but everything exposed by the light becomes visible, 
    14: for everything that becomes visible is light. Therefore, it says:
“Awake, O sleeper,
    and arise from the dead,
and Christ will give you light.”

    15: Watch carefully then how you live, not as foolish persons but as wise, 
    16: making the most of the opportunity, because the days are evil. 
    17: Therefore, do not continue in ignorance, but try to understand what is the will of the Lord. 
    18: And do not get drunk on wine, in which lies debauchery, but be filled with the Spirit, 
    19: addressing one another  psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and playing to the Lord in your hearts, 
    20: giving thanks always and for everything in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ to God the Father.
Wives and Husbands. 
    21: Be subordinate to one another out of reverence for Christ.[f] 
    22: Wives should be subordinate to their husbands as to the Lord. 
    23: For the husband is head of his wife just as Christ is head of the church, he himself the savior of the body. 
    24: As the church is subordinate to Christ, so wives should be subordinate to their husbands in everything. 
    25: Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ loved the church and handed himself over for her 
    26: to sanctify her, cleansing her by the bath of water with the word, 
    27: that he might present to himself the church in splendor, without spot or wrinkle or any such thing, that she might be holy and without blemish. 
    28: So  husbands should love their wives as their own bodies. He who loves his wife loves himself. 
    29: For no one hates his own flesh but rather nourishes and cherishes it, even as Christ does the church, 
    30: because we are members of his body.

    31: 
“For this reason a man shall leave  father and  mother
    and be joined to his wife,
and the two shall become one flesh.”

    32: This is a great mystery, but I speak in reference to Christ and the church. 
    33: In any case, each one of you should love his wife as himself, and the wife should respect her husband.


  Chapter 6.

    1: Children, obey your parents , for this is right. 
    2: “Honor your father and mother.” This is the first commandment with a promise, 
    3: “that it may go well with you and that you may have a long life on earth.” 
    4: Fathers, do not provoke your children to anger, but bring them up with the training and instruction of the Lord.
Slaves and Masters. 
    5: 
    6: Children and Parents. 1 Children, obey your parents , for this is right. 2 “Honor your father and mother.” This is the first commandment with a promise, 3 “that it may go well with you and that you may have a long life on earth.” 4 Fathers, do not provoke your children to anger, but bring them up with the training and instruction of the Lord.
Slaves and Masters. 5 Slaves, be obedient to your human masters with fear and trembling, in sincerity of heart, as to Christ, 6 not only when being watched, as currying favor, but as slaves of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart, 
    7: willingly serving the Lord and not human beings, 
    8: knowing that each will be requited from the Lord for whatever good he does, whether he is slave or free. 
    9: asters, act in the same way toward them, and stop bullying, knowing that both they and you have a Master in heaven and that with him there is no partiality.
Battle Against Evil. 
    10: Finally, draw your strength from the Lord and from his mighty power. 
    11: Put on the armor of God so that you may be able to stand firm against the tactics of the devil. 
    12: For our struggle is not with flesh and blood but with the principalities, with the powers, with the world rulers of this present darkness, with the evil spirits in the heavens. 
    13: Therefore, put on the armor of God, that you may be able to resist on the evil day and, having done everything, to hold your ground. 
    14: So stand fast with your loins girded in truth, clothed with righteousness as a breastplate, 
    15: and your feet shod in readiness for the gospel of peace. 
    16: In all circumstances, hold faith as a shield, to quench all  flaming arrows of the evil one. 
    17: And take the helmet of salvation and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.
Constant Prayer. 
    18: With all prayer and supplication, pray at every opportunity in the Spirit. To that end, be watchful with all perseverance and supplication for all the holy ones 
    19: and also for me, that speech may be given me to open my mouth, to make known with boldness the mystery of the gospel 
    20: for which I am an ambassador in chains, so that I may have the courage to speak as I must.
V. Conclusion
A Final Message. 
    21: So that you also may have news of me and of what I am doing, Tychicus, my beloved brother and trustworthy minister in the Lord, will tell you everything. 
    22: I am sending him to you for this very purpose, so that you may know about us and that he may encourage your hearts.

    23: Peace be to the brothers, and love with faith, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. 
    24: Grace be with all who love our Lord Jesus Christ in immortality.


End of day 328.