Day 213:

Reading Isaiah, chapters ['5', '6', '7', '8']:

  Chapter 5.

    1: 
Now let me sing of my friend,
    my beloved’s song about his vineyard.
My friend had a vineyard
    on a fertile hillside;

    2: 
He spaded it, cleared it of stones,
    and planted the choicest vines;
Within it he built a watchtower,
    and hewed out a wine press.
Then he waited for the crop of grapes,
    but it yielded rotten grapes.

    3: 
Now, inhabitants of Jerusalem, people of Judah,
    judge between me and my vineyard:

    4: 
    5: The Song of the Vineyard
1 
Now let me sing of my friend,
    my beloved’s song about his vineyard.
My friend had a vineyard
    on a fertile hillside;
2 
He spaded it, cleared it of stones,
    and planted the choicest vines;
Within it he built a watchtower,
    and hewed out a wine press.
Then he waited for the crop of grapes,
    but it yielded rotten grapes.
3 
Now, inhabitants of Jerusalem, people of Judah,
    judge between me and my vineyard:
4 
What more could be done for my vineyard
    that I did not do?
Why, when I waited for the crop of grapes,
    did it yield rotten grapes?
5 
Now, I will let you know
    what I am going to do to my vineyard:
Take away its hedge, give it to grazing,
    break through its wall, let it be trampled![b]

    6: 
Yes, I will make it a ruin:
    it shall not be pruned or hoed,
    but will be overgrown with thorns and briers;
I will command the clouds
    not to rain upon it.

    7: 
The vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel,
    the people of Judah, his cherished plant;
He waited for judgment, but see, bloodshed!
    for justice, but hark, the outcry!
Oracles of Reproach[d]

    8: 
Ah! Those who join house to house,
    who connect field with field,
Until no space remains, and you alone dwell
    in the midst of the land!

    9: In my hearing the Lord of hosts has sworn:
    Many houses shall be in ruins,
    houses large and fine, with nobody living there.

    10: 
Ten acres of vineyard
    shall yield but one bath,
And a homer of seed
    shall yield but an ephah.

    11: 
Ah! Those who rise early in the morning
    in pursuit of strong drink,
lingering late
    inflamed by wine,

    12: 
Banqueting on wine with harp and lyre,
    timbrel and flute,
But the deed of the Lord they do not regard,
    the work of his hands they do not see!

    13: 
Therefore my people go into exile
    for lack of understanding,
Its nobles starving,
    its masses parched with thirst.

    14: 
Therefore Sheol enlarges its throat
    and opens its mouth beyond measure;
Down into it go nobility and masses,
    tumult and revelry.

    15: 
All shall be abased, each one brought low,
    and the eyes of the haughty lowered,

    16: 
But the Lord of hosts shall be exalted by judgment,
    by justice the Holy God shown holy.

    17: 
Lambs shall graze as at pasture,
    young goats shall eat in the ruins of the rich.

    18: 
Ah! Those who tug at guilt with cords of perversity,
    and at sin as if with cart ropes!

    19: 
Who say, “Let him make haste,
    let him speed his work, that we may see it;
On with the plan of the Holy One of Israel!
    let it come to pass, that we may know it!”

    20: 
Ah! Those who call evil good, and good evil,
    who change darkness to light, and light into darkness,
    who change bitter to sweet, and sweet into bitter!

    21: 
Ah! Those who are wise in their own eyes,
    prudent in their own view!

    22: 
Ah! Those who are champions at drinking wine,
    masters at mixing drink!

    23: 
Those who acquit the guilty for bribes,
    and deprive the innocent of justice!

    24: 
Therefore, as the tongue of fire licks up stubble,
    as dry grass shrivels in the flame,
Their root shall rot
    and their blossom scatter like dust;
For they have rejected the instruction of the Lord of hosts,
    and scorned the word of the Holy One of Israel.

    25: 
Therefore the wrath of the Lord blazes against his people,
    he stretches out his hand to strike them;
The mountains quake,
    their corpses shall be like refuse in the streets.
For all this, his wrath is not turned back,
    his hand is still outstretched.
Invasion[j]

    26: 
He will raise a signal to a far-off nation,
    and whistle for it from the ends of the earth.
    Then speedily and promptly they will come.

    27: 
None among them is weary, none stumbles,
    none will slumber, none will sleep.
None with waist belt loose,
    none with sandal thong broken.

    28: 
Their arrows are sharp,
    and all their bows are bent,
The hooves of their horses like flint,
    and their chariot wheels like the whirlwind.

    29: 
They roar like the lion,
    like young lions, they roar;
They growl and seize the prey,
    they carry it off and none can rescue.

    30: 
They will growl over it, on that day,
    like the growling of the sea,
Look to the land—
    darkness closing in,
    the light dark with clouds!


  Chapter 6.

    1: In the year King Uzziah died, I saw the Lord seated on a high and lofty throne, with the train of his garment filling the temple. 
    2: Seraphim were stationed above; each of them had six wings: with two they covered their faces, with two they covered their feet, and with two they hovered. 
    3: One cried out to the other:
“Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts!
    All the earth is filled with his glory!”

    4: At the sound of that cry, the frame of the door shook and the house was filled with smoke.

    5: 
    6: The Sending of Isaiah. 1 In the year King Uzziah died, I saw the Lord seated on a high and lofty throne, with the train of his garment filling the temple. 2 Seraphim[b] were stationed above; each of them had six wings: with two they covered their faces, with two they covered their feet, and with two they hovered. 3 One cried out to the other:
“Holy, holy, holy[c] is the Lord of hosts!
    All the earth is filled with his glory!”
4 At the sound of that cry, the frame of the door shook and the house was filled with smoke.[d]
5 Then I said, “Woe is me, I am doomed![e] For I am a man of unclean lips, living among a people of unclean lips, and my eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts!” 6 Then one of the seraphim flew to me, holding an ember which he had taken with tongs from the altar.

    7: He touched my mouth with it. “See,” he said, “now that this has touched your lips, your wickedness is removed, your sin purged.”

    8: Then I heard the voice of the Lord saying, “Whom shall I send? Who will go for us?” “Here I am,” I said; “send me!” 
    9: g]And he replied: Go and say to this people:
Listen carefully, but do not understand!
Look intently, but do not perceive!

    10: 
Make the heart of this people sluggish,
    dull their ears and close their eyes;
Lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears,
    and their heart understand,
    and they turn and be healed.

    11: “How long, O Lord?” I asked. And he replied:
 Until the cities are desolate,
    without inhabitants,
Houses, without people,
    and the land is a desolate waste.

    12: 
Until the Lord sends the people far away,
    and great is the desolation in the midst of the land.

    13: 
If there remain a tenth part in it,
    then this in turn shall be laid waste;
As with a terebinth or an oak
    whose trunk remains when its leaves have fallen.
    Holy offspring is the trunk.


  Chapter 7.

    1: In the days of Ahaz, king of Judah, son of Jotham, son of Uzziah, Rezin, king of Aram, and Pekah, king of Israel, son of Remaliah, went up to attack Jerusalem, but they were not able to conquer it. 
    2: When word came to the house of David that Aram had allied itself with Ephraim, the heart of the king and heart of the people trembled, as the trees of the forest tremble in the wind.

    3: Then the Lord said to Isaiah: Go out to meet Ahaz, you and your son Shear-jashub, at the end of the conduit of the upper pool, on the highway to the fuller’s field, 
    4: and say to him: Take care you remain calm and do not fear; do not let your courage fail before these two stumps of smoldering brands, the blazing anger of Rezin and the Arameans and of the son of Remaliah— 
    5: because Aram, with Ephraim and the son of Remaliah, has planned evil against you. They say, 
    6: 
    7: The Syro-Ephraimite War
Crisis in Judah. 1 In the days of Ahaz,[b] king of Judah, son of Jotham, son of Uzziah, Rezin, king of Aram, and Pekah, king of Israel, son of Remaliah, went up to attack Jerusalem, but they were not able to conquer it. 2 When word came to the house of David that Aram had allied itself with Ephraim, the heart of the king and heart of the people trembled, as the trees of the forest tremble in the wind.
3 Then the Lord said to Isaiah: Go out to meet Ahaz, you and your son Shear-jashub,[c] at the end of the conduit of the upper pool, on the highway to the fuller’s field, 4 and say to him: Take care you remain calm and do not fear; do not let your courage fail before these two stumps of smoldering brands, the blazing anger of Rezin and the Arameans and of the son of Remaliah— 5 because Aram, with Ephraim and the son of Remaliah, has planned[d] evil against you. They say, 6 “Let us go up against Judah, tear it apart, make it our own by force, and appoint the son of Tabeel[e] king there.”
7 
Thus says the Lord God:
    It shall not stand, it shall not be!

    8: 
The head of Aram is Damascus,
    and the head of Damascus is Rezin;

    9: The head of Ephraim is Samaria,
    and the head of Samaria is the son of Remaliah.
Within sixty-five years,
    Ephraim shall be crushed, no longer a nation.
Unless your faith is firm,
    you shall not be firm!
Emmanuel. 
    10: Again the Lord spoke to Ahaz: 
    11: Ask for a sign from the Lord, your God; let it be deep as Sheol, or high as the sky! 
    12: But Ahaz answered, “I will not ask! I will not tempt the Lord!” 
    13: Then he said: Listen, house of David! Is it not enough that you weary human beings? Must you also weary my God? 
    14: Therefore the Lord himself will give you a sign; the young woman, pregnant and about to bear a son, shall name him Emmanuel. 
    15: Curds and honey he will eat so that he may learn to reject evil and choose good; 
    16: for before the child learns to reject evil and choose good, the land of those two kings whom you dread shall be deserted.

    17: The Lord shall bring upon you and your people and your father’s house such days as have not come since Ephraim seceded from Judah (the king of Assyria). 
    18: On that day
The Lord shall whistle
    for the fly in the farthest streams of Egypt,
    and for the bee in the land of Assyria.

    19: 
All of them shall come and settle
    in the steep ravines and in the rocky clefts,
    on all thornbushes and in all pastures.

    20: On that day the Lord shall shave with the razor hired from across the River (the king of Assyria) the head, and the hair of the feet; it shall also shave off the beard.

    21: On that day a man shall keep alive a young cow or a couple of sheep, 
    22: and from their abundant yield of milk he shall eat curds; curds and honey shall be the food of all who are left in the land. 
    23: On that day every place where there were a thousand vines worth a thousand pieces of silver shall become briers and thorns. 
    24: One shall have to go there with bow and arrows, for all the country shall be briers and thorns. 
    25: But as for all the hills which were hoed with a mattock, for fear of briers and thorns you will not go there; they shall become a place for cattle to roam and sheep to trample.


  Chapter 8.

    1: The Lord said to me: Take a large tablet, and inscribe on it with an ordinary stylus, “belonging to Maher-shalal-hash-baz,” 
    2: and call reliable witnesses for me, Uriah the priest, and Zechariah, son of Jeberechiah.

    3: Then I went to the prophetess and she conceived and bore a son. The Lord said to me: Name him Maher-shalal-hash-baz, 
    4: for before the child learns to say, “My father, my mother,” the wealth of Damascus and the spoils of Samaria shall be carried off by the king of Assyria.
The Choice: The Lord or Assyria. 
    5: Again the Lord spoke to me:

    6: 
Because this people has rejected
    the waters of Shiloah that flow gently,
And melts with fear at the display of Rezin and Remaliah’s son,

    7: 
    8: A Son of Isaiah. 1 The Lord said to me: Take a large tablet, and inscribe on it with an ordinary stylus, “belonging to Maher-shalal-hash-baz,” 2 and call reliable witnesses[b] for me, Uriah the priest, and Zechariah, son of Jeberechiah.
3 Then I went to the prophetess and she conceived and bore a son. The Lord said to me: Name him Maher-shalal-hash-baz, 4 for before the child learns to say, “My father, my mother,” the wealth of Damascus and the spoils of Samaria shall be carried off by the king of Assyria.
The Choice: The Lord or Assyria. 5 Again the Lord spoke to me:
6 
Because this people[c] has rejected
    the waters of Shiloah that flow gently,
And melts with fear at the display of Rezin and Remaliah’s son,
7 
Therefore the Lord is bringing up against them
    the waters of the River, great and mighty,
    the king of Assyria and all his glory.
It shall rise above all its channels,
    and overflow all its banks.
8 
It shall roll on into Judah,
    it shall rage and pass on—
    up to the neck it shall reach.
But his outspread wings will fill
    the width of your land, Emmanuel!

    9: Band together, O peoples, but be shattered!
    Give ear, all you distant lands!
    Arm yourselves, but be shattered! Arm yourselves, but be shattered!

    10: 
Form a plan, it shall be thwarted;
    make a resolve, it shall not be carried out,
    for “With us is God!”
Disciples of Isaiah. 
    11: For thus said the Lord—his hand strong upon me—warning me not to walk in the way of this people:

    12: 
Do not call conspiracy what this people calls conspiracy,
    nor fear what they fear, nor feel dread.

    13: 
But conspire with the Lord of hosts;
    he shall be your fear, he shall be your dread.

    14: 
He shall be a snare,
    a stone for injury,
A rock for stumbling
    to both the houses of Israel,
A trap and a snare
    to those who dwell in Jerusalem;

    15: 
And many among them shall stumble;
    fallen and broken;
    snared and captured.

    16: Bind up my testimony, seal the instruction with my disciples. 
    17: I will trust in the Lord, who is hiding his face from the house of Jacob; yes, I will wait for him. 
    18: Here am I and the children whom the Lord has given me: we are signs and portents in Israel from the Lord of hosts, who dwells on Mount Zion.

    19: And when they say to you, “Inquire of ghosts and soothsayers who chirp and mutter; should not a people inquire of their gods, consulting the dead on behalf of the living, 
    20: for instruction and testimony?” Surely, those who speak like this are the ones for whom there is no dawn.

    21: 
He will pass through it hard-pressed and hungry,
    and when hungry, shall become enraged,
    and curse king and gods.
He will look upward,

    22: 
    and will gaze at the earth,
But will see only distress and darkness,
    oppressive gloom,
    murky, without light.
The Promise of Salvation Under a New Davidic King.[k] 
    23: There is no gloom where there had been distress. Where once he degraded the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, now he has glorified the way of the Sea, the land across the Jordan, Galilee of the Nations.


End of day 213.