Day 287:

Reading Matthew, chapters ['17', '18', '19', '20']:

  Chapter 17.

    1: 
The Transfiguration of Jesus. 1 After six days Jesus took Peter, James, and John his brother, and led them up a high mountain by themselves.[b] 
    2: And he was transfigured before them; his face shone like the sun and his clothes became white as light. 
    3: And behold, Moses and Elijah appeared to them, conversing with him. 
    4: Then Peter said to Jesus in reply, “Lord, it is good that we are here. If you wish, I will make three tents here, one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.” 
    5: While he was still speaking, behold, a bright cloud cast a shadow over them, then from the cloud came a voice that said, “This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased; listen to him.” 
    6: 
    7: The Transfiguration of Jesus. 1 After six days Jesus took Peter, James, and John his brother, and led them up a high mountain by themselves.[b] 2 [c]And he was transfigured before them; his face shone like the sun and his clothes became white as light. 3 [d]And behold, Moses and Elijah appeared to them, conversing with him. 4 Then Peter said to Jesus in reply, “Lord, it is good that we are here. If you wish, I will make three tents[e] here, one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.” 5 While he was still speaking, behold, a bright cloud cast a shadow over them,[f] then from the cloud came a voice that said, “This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased; listen to him.” 6 [g]When the disciples heard this, they fell prostrate and were very much afraid. 7 But Jesus came and touched them, saying, “Rise, and do not be afraid.” 
    8: And when the disciples raised their eyes, they saw no one else but Jesus alone.
The Coming of Elijah. 
    9: s they were coming down from the mountain, Jesus charged them, “Do not tell the vision to anyone until the Son of Man has been raised from the dead.” 
    10: Then the disciples asked him, “Why do the scribes say that Elijah must come first?” 
    11: He said in reply, “Elijah will indeed come and restore all things; 
    12: but I tell you that Elijah has already come, and they did not recognize him but did to him whatever they pleased. So also will the Son of Man suffer at their hands.” 
    13: Then the disciples understood that he was speaking to them of John the Baptist.
The Healing of a Boy with a Demon.[m] 
    14: When they came to the crowd a man approached, knelt down before him, 
    15: and said, “Lord, have pity on my son, for he is a lunatic and suffers severely; often he falls into fire, and often into water. 
    16: 
    17: The Transfiguration of Jesus. 1 After six days Jesus took Peter, James, and John his brother, and led them up a high mountain by themselves.[b] 2 [c]And he was transfigured before them; his face shone like the sun and his clothes became white as light. 3 [d]And behold, Moses and Elijah appeared to them, conversing with him. 4 Then Peter said to Jesus in reply, “Lord, it is good that we are here. If you wish, I will make three tents[e] here, one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.” 5 While he was still speaking, behold, a bright cloud cast a shadow over them,[f] then from the cloud came a voice that said, “This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased; listen to him.” 6 [g]When the disciples heard this, they fell prostrate and were very much afraid. 7 But Jesus came and touched them, saying, “Rise, and do not be afraid.” 8 And when the disciples raised their eyes, they saw no one else but Jesus alone.
The Coming of Elijah.[h] 9 As they were coming down from the mountain, Jesus charged them, “Do not tell the vision[i] to anyone until the Son of Man has been raised from the dead.” 10 [j]Then the disciples asked him, “Why do the scribes say that Elijah must come first?” 11 He said in reply,[k] “Elijah will indeed come and restore all things; 12 but I tell you that Elijah has already come, and they did not recognize him but did to him whatever they pleased. So also will the Son of Man suffer at their hands.” 13 [l]Then the disciples understood that he was speaking to them of John the Baptist.
The Healing of a Boy with a Demon.[m] 14 When they came to the crowd a man approached, knelt down before him, 15 and said, “Lord, have pity on my son, for he is a lunatic[n] and suffers severely; often he falls into fire, and often into water. 16 I brought him to your disciples, but they could not cure him.” 17 Jesus said in reply, “O faithless and perverse[o] generation, how long will I be with you? How long will I endure you? Bring him here to me.” 
    18: Jesus rebuked him and the demon came out of him, and from that hour the boy was cured. 
    19: Then the disciples approached Jesus in private and said, “Why could we not drive it out?” 
    20: He said to them, “Because of your little faith. Amen, I say to you, if you have faith the size of a mustard seed, you will say to this mountain, ‘Move from here to there,’ and it will move. Nothing will be impossible for you.” 
    21: ][r]
The Second Prediction of the Passion.[s] 
    22: As they were gathering in Galilee, Jesus said to them, “The Son of Man is to be handed over to men, 
    23: and they will kill him, and he will be raised on the third day.” And they were overwhelmed with grief.
Payment of the Temple Tax. 
    24: When they came to Capernaum, the collectors of the temple tax approached Peter and said, “Doesn’t your teacher pay the temple tax?” 
    25: “Yes,” he said. When he came into the house, before he had time to speak, Jesus asked him, “What is your opinion, Simon? From whom do the kings of the earth take tolls or census tax? From their subjects or from foreigners?” 
    26: When he said, “From foreigners,” Jesus said to him, “Then the subjects are exempt. 
    27: But that we may not offend them, go to the sea, drop in a hook, and take the first fish that comes up. Open its mouth and you will find a coin worth twice the temple tax. Give that to them for me and for you.”


  Chapter 18.

    1: 
The Greatest in the Kingdom. 1 At that time the disciples[b] approached Jesus and said, “Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?” 
    2: He called a child over, placed it in their midst, 
    3: and said, “Amen, I say to you, unless you turn and become like children, you will not enter the kingdom of heaven. 
    4: Whoever humbles himself like this child is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven. 
    5: And whoever receives one child such as this in my name receives me.
Temptations to Sin. 
    6: “Whoever causes one of these little ones who believe in me to sin, it would be better for him to have a great millstone hung around his neck and to be drowned in the depths of the sea. 
    7: 
    8: a]
The Greatest in the Kingdom. 1 At that time the disciples[b] approached Jesus and said, “Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?” 2 He called a child over, placed it in their midst, 3 and said, “Amen, I say to you, unless you turn and become like children,[c] you will not enter the kingdom of heaven. 4 Whoever humbles himself like this child is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven. 5 [d]And whoever receives one child such as this in my name receives me.
Temptations to Sin. 6 “Whoever causes one of these little ones[e] who believe in me to sin, it would be better for him to have a great millstone hung around his neck and to be drowned in the depths of the sea. 7 [f]Woe to the world because of things that cause sin! Such things must come, but woe to the one through whom they come! 8 If your hand or foot causes you to sin,[g] cut it off and throw it away. It is better for you to enter into life maimed or crippled than with two hands or two feet to be thrown into eternal fire. 
    9: nd if your eye causes you to sin, tear it out and throw it away. It is better for you to enter into life with one eye than with two eyes to be thrown into fiery Gehenna.
The Parable of the Lost Sheep. 
    10: “See that you do not despise one of these little ones, for I say to you that their angels in heaven always look upon the face of my heavenly Father. 
    11: ][j] 
    12: What is your opinion? If a man has a hundred sheep and one of them goes astray, will he not leave the ninety-nine in the hills and go in search of the stray? 
    13: And if he finds it, amen, I say to you, he rejoices more over it than over the ninety-nine that did not stray. 
    14: In just the same way, it is not the will of your heavenly Father that one of these little ones be lost.
A Brother Who Sins. 
    15: “If your brother sins [against you], go and tell him his fault between you and him alone. If he listens to you, you have won over your brother. 
    16: If he does not listen, take one or two others along with you, so that ‘every fact may be established on the testimony of two or three witnesses.’ 
    17: 
    18: a]
The Greatest in the Kingdom. 1 At that time the disciples[b] approached Jesus and said, “Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?” 2 He called a child over, placed it in their midst, 3 and said, “Amen, I say to you, unless you turn and become like children,[c] you will not enter the kingdom of heaven. 4 Whoever humbles himself like this child is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven. 5 [d]And whoever receives one child such as this in my name receives me.
Temptations to Sin. 6 “Whoever causes one of these little ones[e] who believe in me to sin, it would be better for him to have a great millstone hung around his neck and to be drowned in the depths of the sea. 7 [f]Woe to the world because of things that cause sin! Such things must come, but woe to the one through whom they come! 8 If your hand or foot causes you to sin,[g] cut it off and throw it away. It is better for you to enter into life maimed or crippled than with two hands or two feet to be thrown into eternal fire. 9 And if your eye causes you to sin, tear it out and throw it away. It is better for you to enter into life with one eye than with two eyes to be thrown into fiery Gehenna.
The Parable of the Lost Sheep.[h] 10 “See that you do not despise one of these little ones,[i] for I say to you that their angels in heaven always look upon the face of my heavenly Father. [11 ][j] 12 What is your opinion? If a man has a hundred sheep and one of them goes astray, will he not leave the ninety-nine in the hills and go in search of the stray? 13 And if he finds it, amen, I say to you, he rejoices more over it than over the ninety-nine that did not stray. 14 In just the same way, it is not the will of your heavenly Father that one of these little ones be lost.
A Brother Who Sins.[k] 15 “If your brother[l] sins [against you], go and tell him his fault between you and him alone. If he listens to you, you have won over your brother. 16 [m]If he does not listen, take one or two others along with you, so that ‘every fact may be established on the testimony of two or three witnesses.’ 17 If he refuses to listen to them, tell the church.[n] If he refuses to listen even to the church, then treat him as you would a Gentile or a tax collector. 18 [o]Amen, I say to you, whatever you bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. 
    19: Again, [amen,] I say to you, if two of you agree on earth about anything for which they are to pray, it shall be granted to them by my heavenly Father. 
    20: For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them.”
The Parable of the Unforgiving Servant.[r] 
    21: Then Peter approaching asked him, “Lord, if my brother sins against me, how often must I forgive him? As many as seven times?” 
    22: Jesus answered, “I say to you, not seven times but seventy-seven times. 
    23: That is why the kingdom of heaven may be likened to a king who decided to settle accounts with his servants. 
    24: When he began the accounting, a debtor was brought before him who owed him a huge amount. 
    25: Since he had no way of paying it back, his master ordered him to be sold, along with his wife, his children, and all his property, in payment of the debt. 
    26: At that, the servant fell down, did him homage, and said, ‘Be patient with me, and I will pay you back in full.’ 
    27: Moved with compassion the master of that servant let him go and forgave him the loan. 
    28: When that servant had left, he found one of his fellow servants who owed him a much smaller amount. He seized him and started to choke him, demanding, ‘Pay back what you owe.’ 
    29: Falling to his knees, his fellow servant begged him, ‘Be patient with me, and I will pay you back.’ 
    30: But he refused. Instead, he had him put in prison until he paid back the debt. 
    31: Now when his fellow servants saw what had happened, they were deeply disturbed, and went to their master and reported the whole affair. 
    32: His master summoned him and said to him, ‘You wicked servant! I forgave you your entire debt because you begged me to. 
    33: Should you not have had pity on your fellow servant, as I had pity on you?’ 
    34: Then in anger his master handed him over to the torturers until he should pay back the whole debt. 
    35: So will my heavenly Father do to you, unless each of you forgives his brother from his heart.”


  Chapter 19.

    1: 
Marriage and Divorce. 1 When Jesus[b] finished these words,[c] he left Galilee and went to the district of Judea across the Jordan. 
    2: Great crowds followed him, and he cured them there. 
    3: Some Pharisees approached him, and tested him, saying, “Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife for any cause whatever?” 
    4: He said in reply, “Have you not read that from the beginning the Creator ‘made them male and female’ 
    5: and said, ‘For this reason a man shall leave his father and mother and be joined to his wife, and the two shall become one flesh’? 
    6: So they are no longer two, but one flesh. Therefore, what God has joined together, no human being must separate.” 
    7: They said to him, “Then why did Moses command that the man give the woman a bill of divorce and dismiss [her]?” 
    8: 
    9: arriage and Divorce. 1 When Jesus[b] finished these words,[c] he left Galilee and went to the district of Judea across the Jordan. 2 Great crowds followed him, and he cured them there. 3 Some Pharisees approached him, and tested him,[d] saying, “Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife for any cause whatever?” 4 [e]He said in reply, “Have you not read that from the beginning the Creator ‘made them male and female’ 5 and said, ‘For this reason a man shall leave his father and mother and be joined to his wife, and the two shall become one flesh’? 6 So they are no longer two, but one flesh. Therefore, what God has joined together, no human being must separate.” 7 [f]They said to him, “Then why did Moses command that the man give the woman a bill of divorce and dismiss [her]?” 8 He said to them, “Because of the hardness of your hearts Moses allowed you to divorce your wives, but from the beginning it was not so. 9 I say to you,[g] whoever divorces his wife (unless the marriage is unlawful) and marries another commits adultery.” 
    10:  disciples said to him, “If that is the case of a man with his wife, it is better not to marry.” 
    11: He answered, “Not all can accept  word,[h] but only those to whom that is granted. 
    12: Some are incapable of marriage because they were born so; some, because they were made so by others; some, because they have renounced marriage for the sake of the kingdom of heaven. Whoever can accept this ought to accept it.”
Blessing of the Children.[j] 
    13: Then children were brought to him that he might lay his hands on them and pray. The disciples rebuked them, 
    14: but Jesus said, “Let the children come to me, and do not prevent them; for the kingdom of heaven belongs to such as these.” 
    15: After he placed his hands on them, he went away.
The Rich Young Man. 
    16: Now someone approached him and said, “Teacher, what good must I do to gain eternal life?” 
    17: He answered him, “Why do you ask me about the good? There is only One who is good. If you wish to enter into life, keep the commandments.” 
    18: 
    19: Marriage and Divorce. 1 When Jesus[b] finished these words,[c] he left Galilee and went to the district of Judea across the Jordan. 2 Great crowds followed him, and he cured them there. 3 Some Pharisees approached him, and tested him,[d] saying, “Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife for any cause whatever?” 4 [e]He said in reply, “Have you not read that from the beginning the Creator ‘made them male and female’ 5 and said, ‘For this reason a man shall leave his father and mother and be joined to his wife, and the two shall become one flesh’? 6 So they are no longer two, but one flesh. Therefore, what God has joined together, no human being must separate.” 7 [f]They said to him, “Then why did Moses command that the man give the woman a bill of divorce and dismiss [her]?” 8 He said to them, “Because of the hardness of your hearts Moses allowed you to divorce your wives, but from the beginning it was not so. 9 I say to you,[g] whoever divorces his wife (unless the marriage is unlawful) and marries another commits adultery.” 10 [His] disciples said to him, “If that is the case of a man with his wife, it is better not to marry.” 11 He answered, “Not all can accept [this] word,[h] but only those to whom that is granted. 12 Some are incapable of marriage because they were born so; some, because they were made so by others; some, because they have renounced marriage[i] for the sake of the kingdom of heaven. Whoever can accept this ought to accept it.”
Blessing of the Children.[j] 13 Then children were brought to him that he might lay his hands on them and pray. The disciples rebuked them, 14 but Jesus said, “Let the children come to me, and do not prevent them; for the kingdom of heaven belongs to such as these.” 15 After he placed his hands on them, he went away.
The Rich Young Man.[k] 16 Now someone approached him and said, “Teacher, what good must I do to gain eternal life?”[l] 17 He answered him, “Why do you ask me about the good? There is only One who is good.[m] If you wish to enter into life, keep the commandments.” 18 [n]He asked him, “Which ones?” And Jesus replied, “ ‘You shall not kill; you shall not commit adultery; you shall not steal; you shall not bear false witness; 19 honor your father and your mother’; and ‘you shall love your neighbor as yourself.’” 
    20: The young man said to him, “All of these I have observed. What do I still lack?” 
    21: Jesus said to him, “If you wish to be perfect, go, sell what you have and give to [the] poor, and you will have treasure in heaven. Then come, follow me.” 
    22: When the young man heard this statement, he went away sad, for he had many possessions. 
    23: Then Jesus said to his disciples, “Amen, I say to you, it will be hard for one who is rich to enter the kingdom of heaven. 
    24: Again I say to you, it is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle than for one who is rich to enter the kingdom of God.” 
    25: When the disciples heard this, they were greatly astonished and said, “Who then can be saved?” 
    26: Jesus looked at them and said, “For human beings this is impossible, but for God all things are possible.” 
    27: Then Peter said to him in reply, “We have given up everything and followed you. What will there be for us?” 
    28: Jesus said to them, “Amen, I say to you that you who have followed me, in the new age, when the Son of Man is seated on his throne of glory, will yourselves sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. 
    29: And everyone who has given up houses or brothers or sisters or father or mother or children or lands for the sake of my name will receive a hundred times more, and will inherit eternal life. 
    30: But many who are first will be last, and the last will be first.


  Chapter 20.

    1: 
    2: 
The Workers in the Vineyard. 1 “The kingdom of heaven is like a landowner who went out at dawn to hire laborers for his vineyard. 2 After agreeing with them for the usual daily wage, he sent them into his vineyard. 
    3: Going out about nine o’clock, he saw others standing idle in the marketplace, 
    4: and he said to them, ‘You too go into my vineyard, and I will give you what is just.’ 
    5: So they went off.  he went out again around noon, and around three o’clock, and did likewise. 
    6: Going out about five o’clock, he found others standing around, and said to them, ‘Why do you stand here idle all day?’ 
    7: They answered, ‘Because no one has hired us.’ He said to them, ‘You too go into my vineyard.’ 
    8: When it was evening the owner of the vineyard said to his foreman, ‘Summon the laborers and give them their pay, beginning with the last and ending with the first.’ 
    9: hen those who had started about five o’clock came, each received the usual daily wage. 
    10: So when the first came, they thought that they would receive more, but each of them also got the usual wage. 
    11: And on receiving it they grumbled against the landowner, 
    12: saying, ‘These last ones worked only one hour, and you have made them equal to us, who bore the day’s burden and the heat.’ 
    13: He said to one of them in reply, ‘My friend, I am not cheating you. Did you not agree with me for the usual daily wage? 
    14: Take what is yours and go. What if I wish to give this last one the same as you? 
    15:  am I not free to do as I wish with my own money? Are you envious because I am generous?’ 
    16: Thus, the last will be first, and the first will be last.”
The Third Prediction of the Passion.[g] 
    17: As Jesus was going up to Jerusalem, he took the twelve  aside by themselves, and said to them on the way, 
    18: “Behold, we are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be handed over to the chief priests and the scribes, and they will condemn him to death, 
    19: 
    20: The Workers in the Vineyard. 1 “The kingdom of heaven is like a landowner who went out at dawn to hire laborers for his vineyard. 2 After agreeing with them for the usual daily wage, he sent them into his vineyard. 3 Going out about nine o’clock, he saw others standing idle in the marketplace, 4 [b]and he said to them, ‘You too go into my vineyard, and I will give you what is just.’ 5 So they went off. [And] he went out again around noon, and around three o’clock, and did likewise. 6 Going out about five o’clock, he found others standing around, and said to them, ‘Why do you stand here idle all day?’ 7 They answered, ‘Because no one has hired us.’ He said to them, ‘You too go into my vineyard.’ 8 [c]When it was evening the owner of the vineyard said to his foreman, ‘Summon the laborers and give them their pay, beginning with the last and ending with the first.’ 9 When those who had started about five o’clock came, each received the usual daily wage. 10 So when the first came, they thought that they would receive more, but each of them also got the usual wage. 11 And on receiving it they grumbled against the landowner, 12 saying, ‘These last ones worked only one hour, and you have made them equal to us, who bore the day’s burden and the heat.’ 13 He said to one of them in reply, ‘My friend, I am not cheating you.[d] Did you not agree with me for the usual daily wage? 14 [e]Take what is yours and go. What if I wish to give this last one the same as you? 15 [Or] am I not free to do as I wish with my own money? Are you envious because I am generous?’ 16 [f]Thus, the last will be first, and the first will be last.”
The Third Prediction of the Passion.[g] 17 As Jesus was going up to Jerusalem, he took the twelve [disciples] aside by themselves, and said to them on the way, 18 “Behold, we are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be handed over to the chief priests and the scribes, and they will condemn him to death, 19 and hand him over to the Gentiles to be mocked and scourged and crucified, and he will be raised on the third day.”
The Request of James and John.[h] 20 Then the mother[i] of the sons of Zebedee approached him with her sons and did him homage, wishing to ask him for something. 
    21: He said to her, “What do you wish?” She answered him, “Command that these two sons of mine sit, one at your right and the other at your left, in your kingdom.” 
    22: Jesus said in reply, “You do not know what you are asking. Can you drink the cup that I am going to drink?” They said to him, “We can.” 
    23: He replied, “My cup you will indeed drink, but to sit at my right and at my left  is not mine to give but is for those for whom it has been prepared by my Father.” 
    24: When the ten heard this, they became indignant at the two brothers. 
    25: But Jesus summoned them and said, “You know that the rulers of the Gentiles lord it over them, and the great ones make their authority over them felt. 
    26: But it shall not be so among you. Rather, whoever wishes to be great among you shall be your servant; 
    27: whoever wishes to be first among you shall be your slave. 
    28: Just so, the Son of Man did not come to be served but to serve and to give his life as a ransom for many.”
The Healing of Two Blind Men.[l] 
    29: As they left Jericho, a great crowd followed him. 
    30: Two blind men were sitting by the roadside, and when they heard that Jesus was passing by, they cried out, “[m] Son of David, have pity on us!” 
    31: The crowd warned them to be silent, but they called out all the more, “Lord, Son of David, have pity on us!” 
    32: Jesus stopped and called them and said, “What do you want me to do for you?” 
    33: They answered him, “Lord, let our eyes be opened.” 
    34: Moved with pity, Jesus touched their eyes. Immediately they received their sight, and followed him.


End of day 287.