Day 301:

Reading John, chapters ['5', '6', '7', '8']:

  Chapter 5.

    1: After this, there was a feast of the Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem. 
    2: Now there is in Jerusalem at the Sheep [c] a pool called in Hebrew Bethesda, with five porticoes. 
    3: In these lay a large number of ill, blind, lame, and crippled. 
    4: 
    5: a]
Cure on a Sabbath. 1 After this, there was a feast[b] of the Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem. 2 Now there is in Jerusalem at the Sheep [Gate][c] a pool called in Hebrew Bethesda, with five porticoes. 3 In these lay a large number of ill, blind, lame, and crippled.[d] [4 ][e] 5 One man was there who had been ill for thirty-eight years. 
    6: When Jesus saw him lying there and knew that he had been ill for a long time, he said to him, “Do you want to be well?” 
    7: The sick man answered him, “Sir, I have no one to put me into the pool when the water is stirred up; while I am on my way, someone else gets down there before me.” 
    8: Jesus said to him, “Rise, take up your mat, and walk.” 
    9: mmediately the man became well, took up his mat, and walked.
Now that day was a sabbath. 
    10: So the Jews said to the man who was cured, “It is the sabbath, and it is not lawful for you to carry your mat.” 
    11: He answered them, “The man who made me well told me, ‘Take up your mat and walk.’” 
    12: They asked him, “Who is the man who told you, ‘Take it up and walk’?” 
    13: The man who was healed did not know who it was, for Jesus had slipped away, since there was a crowd there. 
    14: After this Jesus found him in the temple area and said to him, “Look, you are well; do not sin any more, so that nothing worse may happen to you.” 
    15: The man went and told the Jews that Jesus was the one who had made him well. 
    16: Therefore, the Jews began to persecute Jesus because he did this on a sabbath. 
    17: But Jesus answered them, “My Father is at work until now, so I am at work.” 
    18: For this reason the Jews tried all the more to kill him, because he not only broke the sabbath but he also called God his own father, making himself equal to God.
The Work of the Son. 
    19: Jesus answered and said to them, “Amen, amen, I say to you, a son cannot do anything on his own, but only what he sees his father doing; for what he does, his son will do also. 
    20: For the Father loves his Son and shows him everything that he himself does, and he will show him greater works than these, so that you may be amazed. 
    21: For just as the Father raises the dead and gives life, so also does the Son give life to whomever he wishes. 
    22: Nor does the Father judge anyone, but he has given all judgment to his Son, 
    23: so that all may honor the Son just as they honor the Father. Whoever does not honor the Son does not honor the Father who sent him. 
    24: Amen, amen, I say to you, whoever hears my word and believes in the one who sent me has eternal life and will not come to condemnation, but has passed from death to life. 
    25: Amen, amen, I say to you, the hour is coming and is now here when the dead will hear the voice of the Son of God, and those who hear will live. 
    26: For just as the Father has life in himself, so also he gave to his Son the possession of life in himself. 
    27: And he gave him power to exercise judgment, because he is the Son of Man. 
    28: Do not be amazed at this, because the hour is coming in which all who are in the tombs will hear his voice 
    29: and will come out, those who have done good deeds to the resurrection of life, but those who have done wicked deeds to the resurrection of condemnation.

    30: “I cannot do anything on my own; I judge as I hear, and my judgment is just, because I do not seek my own will but the will of the one who sent me.
Witnesses to Jesus. 
    31: “If I testify on my own behalf, my testimony cannot be verified. 
    32: But there is another who testifies on my behalf, and I know that the testimony he gives on my behalf is true. 
    33: You sent emissaries to John, and he testified to the truth. 
    34: I do not accept testimony from a human being, but I say this so that you may be saved. 
    35: He was a burning and shining lamp, and for a while you were content to rejoice in his light. 
    36: But I have testimony greater than John’s. The works that the Father gave me to accomplish, these works that I perform testify on my behalf that the Father has sent me. 
    37: Moreover, the Father who sent me has testified on my behalf. But you have never heard his voice nor seen his form, 
    38: and you do not have his word remaining in you, because you do not believe in the one whom he has sent. 
    39: You search the scriptures, because you think you have eternal life through them; even they testify on my behalf. 
    40: But you do not want to come to me to have life.
Unbelief of Jesus’ Hearers. 
    41: “I do not accept human praise; 
    42: moreover, I know that you do not have the love of God in you. 
    43: I came in the name of my Father, but you do not accept me; yet if another comes in his own name, you will accept him. 
    44: How can you believe, when you accept praise from one another and do not seek the praise that comes from the only God? 
    45: Do not think that I will accuse you before the Father: the one who will accuse you is Moses, in whom you have placed your hope. 
    46: For if you had believed Moses, you would have believed me, because he wrote about me. 
    47: But if you do not believe his writings, how will you believe my words?”


  Chapter 6.

    1: After this, Jesus went across the Sea of Galilee .[b] 
    2: A large crowd followed him, because they saw the signs he was performing on the sick. 
    3: Jesus went up on the mountain, and there he sat down with his disciples. 
    4: The Jewish feast of Passover was near. 
    5: 
    6: Multiplication of the Loaves. 1 After this, Jesus went across the Sea of Galilee [of Tiberias].[b] 2 A large crowd followed him, because they saw the signs he was performing on the sick. 3 Jesus went up on the mountain, and there he sat down with his disciples. 4 The Jewish feast of Passover was near. 5 [c]When Jesus raised his eyes and saw that a large crowd was coming to him, he said to Philip, “Where can we buy enough food for them to eat?” 6 [d]He said this to test him, because he himself knew what he was going to do. 
    7: Philip answered him, “Two hundred days’ wages worth of food would not be enough for each of them to have a little [bit].” 
    8: One of his disciples, Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, said to him, 
    9: There is a boy here who has five barley loaves and two fish; but what good are these for so many?” 
    10: Jesus said, “Have the people recline.” Now there was a great deal of grass in that place. So the men reclined, about five thousand in number. 
    11: Then Jesus took the loaves, gave thanks, and distributed them to those who were reclining, and also as much of the fish as they wanted. 
    12: When they had had their fill, he said to his disciples, “Gather the fragments left over, so that nothing will be wasted.” 
    13: So they collected them, and filled twelve wicker baskets with fragments from the five barley loaves that had been more than they could eat. 
    14: When the people saw the sign he had done, they said, “This is truly the Prophet, the one who is to come into the world.” 
    15: Since Jesus knew that they were going to come and carry him off to make him king, he withdrew again to the mountain alone.
Walking on the Water. 
    16: When it was evening, his disciples went down to the sea, 
    17: embarked in a boat, and went across the sea to Capernaum. It had already grown dark, and Jesus had not yet come to them. 
    18: The sea was stirred up because a strong wind was blowing. 
    19: When they had rowed about three or four miles, they saw Jesus walking on the sea and coming near the boat, and they began to be afraid. 
    20: But he said to them, “It is I. Do not be afraid.” 
    21: They wanted to take him into the boat, but the boat immediately arrived at the shore to which they were heading.
The Bread of Life Discourse. 
    22: The next day, the crowd that remained across the sea saw that there had been only one boat there, and that Jesus had not gone along with his disciples in the boat, but only his disciples had left. 
    23: Other boats came from Tiberias near the place where they had eaten the bread when the Lord gave thanks. 
    24: When the crowd saw that neither Jesus nor his disciples were there, they themselves got into boats and came to Capernaum looking for Jesus. 
    25: And when they found him across the sea they said to him, “Rabbi, when did you get here?” 
    26: Jesus answered them and said, “Amen, amen, I say to you, you are looking for me not because you saw signs but because you ate the loaves and were filled. 
    27: Do not work for food that perishes but for the food that endures for eternal life, which the Son of Man will give you. For on him the Father, God, has set his seal.” 
    28: So they said to him, “What can we do to accomplish the works of God?” 
    29: Jesus answered and said to them, “This is the work of God, that you believe in the one he sent.” 
    30: So they said to him, “What sign can you do, that we may see and believe in you? What can you do? 
    31: Our ancestors ate manna in the desert, as it is written:
‘He gave them bread from heaven to eat.’”

    32: So Jesus said to them, “Amen, amen, I say to you, it was not Moses who gave the bread from heaven; my Father gives you the true bread from heaven. 
    33: For the bread of God is that which comes down from heaven and gives life to the world.”

    34: So they said to him, “Sir, give us this bread always.” 
    35: Jesus said to them, “I am the bread of life; whoever comes to me will never hunger, and whoever believes in me will never thirst. 
    36: But I told you that although you have seen , you do not believe. 
    37: Everything that the Father gives me will come to me, and I will not reject anyone who comes to me, 
    38: because I came down from heaven not to do my own will but the will of the one who sent me. 
    39: And this is the will of the one who sent me, that I should not lose anything of what he gave me, but that I should raise it  the last day. 
    40: For this is the will of my Father, that everyone who sees the Son and believes in him may have eternal life, and I shall raise him  the last day.”

    41: The Jews murmured about him because he said, “I am the bread that came down from heaven,” 
    42: and they said, “Is this not Jesus, the son of Joseph? Do we not know his father and mother? Then how can he say, ‘I have come down from heaven’?” 
    43: Jesus answered and said to them, “Stop murmuring among yourselves. 
    44: No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draw him, and I will raise him on the last day. 
    45: It is written in the prophets:
‘They shall all be taught by God.’
Everyone who listens to my Father and learns from him comes to me. 
    46: Not that anyone has seen the Father except the one who is from God; he has seen the Father. 
    47: Amen, amen, I say to you, whoever believes has eternal life. 
    48: I am the bread of life. 
    49: Your ancestors ate the manna in the desert, but they died; 
    50: this is the bread that comes down from heaven so that one may eat it and not die. 
    51: I am the living bread that came down from heaven; whoever eats this bread will live forever; and the bread that I will give is my flesh for the life of the world.”

    52: The Jews quarreled among themselves, saying, “How can this man give us  flesh to eat?” 
    53: Jesus said to them, “Amen, amen, I say to you, unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood, you do not have life within you. 
    54: Whoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life, and I will raise him on the last day. 
    55: For my flesh is true food, and my blood is true drink. 
    56: Whoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood remains in me and I in him. 
    57: Just as the living Father sent me and I have life because of the Father, so also the one who feeds on me will have life because of me. 
    58: This is the bread that came down from heaven. Unlike your ancestors who ate and still died, whoever eats this bread will live forever.” 
    59: These things he said while teaching in the synagogue in Capernaum.
The Words of Eternal Life. 
    60: Then many of his disciples who were listening said, “This saying is hard; who can accept it?” 
    61: Since Jesus knew that his disciples were murmuring about this, he said to them, “Does this shock you? 
    62: What if you were to see the Son of Man ascending to where he was before? 
    63: It is the spirit that gives life, while the flesh is of no avail. The words I have spoken to you are spirit and life. 
    64: But there are some of you who do not believe.” Jesus knew from the beginning the ones who would not believe and the one who would betray him. 
    65: And he said, “For this reason I have told you that no one can come to me unless it is granted him by my Father.”

    66: As a result of this, many  his disciples returned to their former way of life and no longer accompanied him. 
    67: Jesus then said to the Twelve, “Do you also want to leave?” 
    68: Simon Peter answered him, “Master, to whom shall we go? You have the words of eternal life. 
    69: We have come to believe and are convinced that you are the Holy One of God.” 
    70: Jesus answered them, “Did I not choose you twelve? Yet is not one of you a devil?” 
    71: He was referring to Judas, son of Simon the Iscariot; it was he who would betray him, one of the Twelve.


  Chapter 7.

    1: After this, Jesus moved about within Galilee; but he did not wish to travel in Judea, because the Jews were trying to kill him. 
    2: But the Jewish feast of Tabernacles was near. 
    3: So his brothers said to him, “Leave here and go to Judea, so that your disciples also may see the works you are doing. 
    4: No one works in secret if he wants to be known publicly. If you do these things, manifest yourself to the world.” 
    5: For his brothers did not believe in him. 
    6: 
    7: The Feast of Tabernacles. 1 After this, Jesus moved about within Galilee; but he did not wish to travel in Judea, because the Jews were trying to kill him. 2 But the Jewish feast of Tabernacles was near. 3 So his brothers[b] said to him, “Leave here and go to Judea, so that your disciples also may see the works you are doing. 4 No one works in secret if he wants to be known publicly. If you do these things, manifest yourself to the world.” 5 For his brothers did not believe in him. 6 [c]So Jesus said to them, “My time is not yet here, but the time is always right for you. 7 The world cannot hate you, but it hates me, because I testify to it that its works are evil. 
    8: You go up to the feast. I am not going up to this feast, because my time has not yet been fulfilled.” 
    9: fter he had said this, he stayed on in Galilee.

    10: But when his brothers had gone up to the feast, he himself also went up, not openly but  in secret. 
    11: The Jews were looking for him at the feast and saying, “Where is he?” 
    12: And there was considerable murmuring about him in the crowds. Some said, “He is a good man,”  others said, “No; on the contrary, he misleads the crowd.” 
    13: Still, no one spoke openly about him because they were afraid of the Jews.
The First Dialogue. 
    14: When the feast was already half over, Jesus went up into the temple area and began to teach. 
    15: The Jews were amazed and said, “How does he know scripture without having studied?” 
    16: Jesus answered them and said, “My teaching is not my own but is from the one who sent me. 
    17: Whoever chooses to do his will shall know whether my teaching is from God or whether I speak on my own. 
    18: Whoever speaks on his own seeks his own glory, but whoever seeks the glory of the one who sent him is truthful, and there is no wrong in him. 
    19: Did not Moses give you the law? Yet none of you keeps the law. Why are you trying to kill me?” 
    20: The crowd answered, “You are possessed! Who is trying to kill you?” 
    21: Jesus answered and said to them, “I performed one work and all of you are amazed 
    22: because of it. Moses gave you circumcision—not that it came from Moses but rather from the patriarchs—and you circumcise a man on the sabbath. 
    23: If a man can receive circumcision on a sabbath so that the law of Moses may not be broken, are you angry with me because I made a whole person well on a sabbath? 
    24: Stop judging by appearances, but judge justly.”

    25: So some of the inhabitants of Jerusalem said, “Is he not the one they are trying to kill? 
    26: And look, he is speaking openly and they say nothing to him. Could the authorities have realized that he is the Messiah? 
    27: But we know where he is from. When the Messiah comes, no one will know where he is from.” 
    28: So Jesus cried out in the temple area as he was teaching and said, “You know me and also know where I am from. Yet I did not come on my own, but the one who sent me, whom you do not know, is true. 
    29: I know him, because I am from him, and he sent me.” 
    30: So they tried to arrest him, but no one laid a hand upon him, because his hour had not yet come. 
    31: But many of the crowd began to believe in him, and said, “When the Messiah comes, will he perform more signs than this man has done?”
Officers Sent to Arrest Jesus. 
    32: The Pharisees heard the crowd murmuring about him to this effect, and the chief priests and the Pharisees sent guards to arrest him. 
    33: So Jesus said, “I will be with you only a little while longer, and then I will go to the one who sent me. 
    34: You will look for me but not find , and where I am you cannot come.” 
    35: So the Jews said to one another, “Where is he going that we will not find him? Surely he is not going to the dispersion among the Greeks to teach the Greeks, is he? 
    36: What is the meaning of his saying, ‘You will look for me and not find , and where I am you cannot come’?”
Rivers of Living Water.[m] 
    37: On the last and greatest day of the feast, Jesus stood up and exclaimed, “Let anyone who thirsts come to me and drink. 
    38: Whoever believes in me, as scripture says:
‘Rivers of living water will flow from within him.’”

    39: He said this in reference to the Spirit that those who came to believe in him were to receive. There was, of course, no Spirit yet, because Jesus had not yet been glorified.
Discussion About the Origins of the Messiah.[p] 
    40: Some in the crowd who heard these words said, “This is truly the Prophet.” 
    41: Others said, “This is the Messiah.” But others said, “The Messiah will not come from Galilee, will he? 
    42: Does not scripture say that the Messiah will be of David’s family and come from Bethlehem, the village where David lived?” 
    43: So a division occurred in the crowd because of him. 
    44: Some of them even wanted to arrest him, but no one laid hands on him.

    45: So the guards went to the chief priests and Pharisees, who asked them, “Why did you not bring him?” 
    46: The guards answered, “Never before has anyone spoken like this one.” 
    47: So the Pharisees answered them, “Have you also been deceived? 
    48: Have any of the authorities or the Pharisees believed in him? 
    49: But this crowd, which does not know the law, is accursed.” 
    50: Nicodemus, one of their members who had come to him earlier, said to them, 
    51: “Does our law condemn a person before it first hears him and finds out what he is doing?” 
    52: They answered and said to him, “You are not from Galilee also, are you? Look and see that no prophet arises from Galilee.”
Chapter 8
A Woman Caught in Adultery. 
    53: Then each went to his own house,


  Chapter 8.

    1: while Jesus went to the Mount of Olives. 
    2: 
    3: Then each went to his own house, 1 while Jesus went to the Mount of Olives. 2 But early in the morning he arrived again in the temple area, and all the people started coming to him, and he sat down and taught them. 3 Then the scribes and the Pharisees brought a woman who had been caught in adultery and made her stand in the middle. 
    4: 
    5:  Then each went to his own house, 1 while Jesus went to the Mount of Olives. 2 But early in the morning he arrived again in the temple area, and all the people started coming to him, and he sat down and taught them. 3 Then the scribes and the Pharisees brought a woman who had been caught in adultery and made her stand in the middle. 4 They said to him, “Teacher, this woman was caught in the very act of committing adultery. 5 Now in the law, Moses commanded us to stone such women.[c] So what do you say?” 
    6: They said this to test him, so that they could have some charge to bring against him. Jesus bent down and began to write on the ground with his finger. 
    7: 
    8: A Woman Caught in Adultery. [53 Then each went to his own house, 1 while Jesus went to the Mount of Olives.[b] 2 But early in the morning he arrived again in the temple area, and all the people started coming to him, and he sat down and taught them. 3 Then the scribes and the Pharisees brought a woman who had been caught in adultery and made her stand in the middle. 4 They said to him, “Teacher, this woman was caught in the very act of committing adultery. 5 Now in the law, Moses commanded us to stone such women.[c] So what do you say?” 6 They said this to test him, so that they could have some charge to bring against him. Jesus bent down and began to write on the ground with his finger.[d] 7 [e]But when they continued asking him, he straightened up and said to them, “Let the one among you who is without sin be the first to throw a stone at her.” 8 Again he bent down and wrote on the ground. 
    9: nd in response, they went away one by one, beginning with the elders. So he was left alone with the woman before him. 
    10: Then Jesus straightened up and said to her, “Woman, where are they? Has no one condemned you?” 
    11: She replied, “No one, sir.” Then Jesus said, “Neither do I condemn you. Go,  from now on do not sin any more.”]
The Light of the World.[f] 
    12: Jesus spoke to them again, saying, “I am the light of the world. Whoever follows me will not walk in darkness, but will have the light of life.” 
    13: So the Pharisees said to him, “You testify on your own behalf, so your testimony cannot be verified.” 
    14: Jesus answered and said to them, “Even if I do testify on my own behalf, my testimony can be verified, because I know where I came from and where I am going. But you do not know where I come from or where I am going. 
    15: You judge by appearances, but I do not judge anyone. 
    16: And even if I should judge, my judgment is valid, because I am not alone, but it is I and the Father who sent me. 
    17: Even in your law it is written that the testimony of two men can be verified. 
    18: I testify on my behalf and so does the Father who sent me.” 
    19: So they said to him, “Where is your father?” Jesus answered, “You know neither me nor my Father. If you knew me, you would know my Father also.” 
    20: He spoke these words while teaching in the treasury in the temple area. But no one arrested him, because his hour had not yet come.
Jesus, the Father’s Ambassador. 
    21: He said to them again, “I am going away and you will look for me, but you will die in your sin. Where I am going you cannot come.” 
    22: So the Jews said, “He is not going to kill himself, is he, because he said, ‘Where I am going you cannot come’?” 
    23: He said to them, “You belong to what is below, I belong to what is above. You belong to this world, but I do not belong to this world. 
    24: That is why I told you that you will die in your sins. For if you do not believe that I AM, you will die in your sins.” 
    25: So they said to him, “Who are you?” Jesus said to them, “What I told you from the beginning. 
    26: I have much to say about you in condemnation. But the one who sent me is true, and what I heard from him I tell the world.” 
    27: They did not realize that he was speaking to them of the Father. 
    28: So Jesus said , “When you lift up the Son of Man, then you will realize that I AM, and that I do nothing on my own, but I say only what the Father taught me. 
    29: The one who sent me is with me. He has not left me alone, because I always do what is pleasing to him.” 
    30: Because he spoke this way, many came to believe in him.
Jesus and Abraham. 
    31: Jesus then said to those Jews who believed in him, “If you remain in my word, you will truly be my disciples, 
    32: and you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.” 
    33: They answered him, “We are descendants of Abraham and have never been enslaved to anyone. How can you say, ‘You will become free’?” 
    34: Jesus answered them, “Amen, amen, I say to you, everyone who commits sin is a slave of sin. 
    35: A slave does not remain in a household forever, but a son always remains. 
    36: So if a son frees you, then you will truly be free. 
    37: I know that you are descendants of Abraham. But you are trying to kill me, because my word has no room among you. 
    38: I tell you what I have seen in the Father’s presence; then do what you have heard from the Father.”

    39: They answered and said to him, “Our father is Abraham.” Jesus said to them, “If you were Abraham’s children, you would be doing the works of Abraham. 
    40: But now you are trying to kill me, a man who has told you the truth that I heard from God; Abraham did not do this. 
    41: You are doing the works of your father!”  they said to him, “We are not illegitimate. We have one Father, God.” 
    42: Jesus said to them, “If God were your Father, you would love me, for I came from God and am here; I did not come on my own, but he sent me. 
    43: Why do you not understand what I am saying? Because you cannot bear to hear my word. 
    44: You belong to your father the devil and you willingly carry out your father’s desires. He was a murderer from the beginning and does not stand in truth, because there is no truth in him. When he tells a lie, he speaks in character, because he is a liar and the father of lies. 
    45: But because I speak the truth, you do not believe me. 
    46: Can any of you charge me with sin? If I am telling the truth, why do you not believe me? 
    47: Whoever belongs to God hears the words of God; for this reason you do not listen, because you do not belong to God.”

    48: The Jews answered and said to him, “Are we not right in saying that you are a Samaritan and are possessed?” 
    49: Jesus answered, “I am not possessed; I honor my Father, but you dishonor me. 
    50: I do not seek my own glory; there is one who seeks it and he is the one who judges. 
    51: Amen, amen, I say to you, whoever keeps my word will never see death.” 
    52: 
    53: Then each went to his own house, 1 while Jesus went to the Mount of Olives. 2 But early in the morning he arrived again in the temple area, and all the people started coming to him, and he sat down and taught them. 3 Then the scribes and the Pharisees brought a woman who had been caught in adultery and made her stand in the middle. 4 They said to him, “Teacher, this woman was caught in the very act of committing adultery. 5 Now in the law, Moses commanded us to stone such women.[c] So what do you say?” 6 They said this to test him, so that they could have some charge to bring against him. Jesus bent down and began to write on the ground with his finger.[d] 7 [e]But when they continued asking him, he straightened up and said to them, “Let the one among you who is without sin be the first to throw a stone at her.” 8 Again he bent down and wrote on the ground. 9 And in response, they went away one by one, beginning with the elders. So he was left alone with the woman before him. 10 Then Jesus straightened up and said to her, “Woman, where are they? Has no one condemned you?” 11 She replied, “No one, sir.” Then Jesus said, “Neither do I condemn you. Go, [and] from now on do not sin any more.”]
The Light of the World.[f] 12 Jesus spoke to them again, saying, “I am the light of the world. Whoever follows me will not walk in darkness, but will have the light of life.” 13 So the Pharisees said to him, “You testify on your own behalf, so your testimony cannot be verified.” 14 Jesus answered and said to them, “Even if I do testify on my own behalf, my testimony can be verified,[g] because I know where I came from and where I am going. But you do not know where I come from or where I am going. 15 You judge by appearances,[h] but I do not judge anyone. 16 And even if I should judge, my judgment is valid, because I am not alone, but it is I and the Father who sent me. 17 Even in your law[i] it is written that the testimony of two men can be verified. 18 I testify on my behalf and so does the Father who sent me.” 19 So they said to him, “Where is your father?” Jesus answered, “You know neither me nor my Father. If you knew me, you would know my Father also.” 20 He spoke these words while teaching in the treasury in the temple area. But no one arrested him, because his hour had not yet come.
Jesus, the Father’s Ambassador.[j] 21 He said to them again, “I am going away and you will look for me, but you will die in your sin.[k] Where I am going you cannot come.” 22 [l]So the Jews said, “He is not going to kill himself, is he, because he said, ‘Where I am going you cannot come’?” 23 He said to them, “You belong to what is below, I belong to what is above. You belong to this world, but I do not belong to this world. 24 That is why I told you that you will die in your sins. For if you do not believe that I AM,[m] you will die in your sins.” 25 [n]So they said to him, “Who are you?” Jesus said to them, “What I told you from the beginning. 26 I have much to say about you in condemnation. But the one who sent me is true, and what I heard from him I tell the world.” 27 They did not realize that he was speaking to them of the Father. 28 So Jesus said [to them], “When you lift up the Son of Man, then you will realize that I AM, and that I do nothing on my own, but I say only what the Father taught me. 29 The one who sent me is with me. He has not left me alone, because I always do what is pleasing to him.” 30 Because he spoke this way, many came to believe in him.
Jesus and Abraham.[o] 31 Jesus then said to those Jews who believed in him,[p] “If you remain in my word, you will truly be my disciples, 32 and you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.” 33 They answered him, “We are descendants of Abraham and have never been enslaved to anyone.[q] How can you say, ‘You will become free’?” 34 Jesus answered them, “Amen, amen, I say to you, everyone who commits sin is a slave of sin. 35 A slave does not remain in a household forever, but a son[r] always remains. 36 So if a son frees you, then you will truly be free. 37 I know that you are descendants of Abraham. But you are trying to kill me, because my word has no room among you. 38 [s]I tell you what I have seen in the Father’s presence; then do what you have heard from the Father.”
39 [t]They answered and said to him, “Our father is Abraham.” Jesus said to them, “If you were Abraham’s children, you would be doing the works of Abraham. 40 But now you are trying to kill me, a man who has told you the truth that I heard from God; Abraham did not do this. 41 You are doing the works of your father!” [So] they said to him, “We are not illegitimate. We have one Father, God.” 42 Jesus said to them, “If God were your Father, you would love me, for I came from God and am here; I did not come on my own, but he sent me. 43 Why do you not understand what I am saying? Because you cannot bear to hear my word. 44 You belong to your father the devil and you willingly carry out your father’s desires. He was a murderer from the beginning and does not stand in truth, because there is no truth in him. When he tells a lie, he speaks in character, because he is a liar and the father of lies. 45 But because I speak the truth, you do not believe me. 46 Can any of you charge me with sin? If I am telling the truth, why do you not believe me? 47 Whoever belongs to God hears the words of God; for this reason you do not listen, because you do not belong to God.”
48 The Jews answered and said to him, “Are we not right in saying that you are a Samaritan[u] and are possessed?” 49 Jesus answered, “I am not possessed; I honor my Father, but you dishonor me. 50 I do not seek my own glory; there is one who seeks it and he is the one who judges. 51 Amen, amen, I say to you, whoever keeps my word will never see death.” 52 [So] the Jews said to him, “Now we are sure that you are possessed. Abraham died, as did the prophets, yet you say, ‘Whoever keeps my word will never taste death.’ 53 Are you greater than our father Abraham,[v] who died? Or the prophets, who died? Who do you make yourself out to be?” 
    54: Jesus answered, “If I glorify myself, my glory is worth nothing; but it is my Father who glorifies me, of whom you say, ‘He is our God.’ 
    55: You do not know him, but I know him. And if I should say that I do not know him, I would be like you a liar. But I do know him and I keep his word. 
    56: Abraham your father rejoiced to see my day; he saw it and was glad. 
    57: So the Jews said to him, “You are not yet fifty years old and you have seen Abraham?” 
    58: Jesus said to them, “Amen, amen, I say to you, before Abraham came to be, I AM.” 
    59: So they picked up stones to throw at him; but Jesus hid and went out of the temple area.


End of day 301.