Day 93:

Reading 1-Chronicles, chapters ['17', '18', '19', '20']:

  Chapter 17.

    1: 
The Oracle of Nathan. 1 After David had taken up residence in his house, he said to Nathan the prophet, “See, I am living in a house of cedar, but the ark of the covenant of the Lord is under tentcloth.” 
    2: Nathan replied to David, “Whatever is in your heart, go and do, for God is with you.”

    3: But that same night the word of God came to Nathan: 
    4: Go and tell David my servant, Thus says the Lord: It is not you who are to build the house for me to dwell in. 
    5: For I have never dwelt in a house, from the day I brought Israel up, even to this day, but I have been lodging in tent or tabernacle. 
    6: 
    7: The Oracle of Nathan. 1 After David had taken up residence in his house, he said to Nathan the prophet, “See, I am living in a house of cedar, but the ark of the covenant of the Lord is under tentcloth.” 2 Nathan replied to David, “Whatever is in your heart, go and do, for God is with you.”
3 But that same night the word of God came to Nathan: 4 Go and tell David my servant, Thus says the Lord: It is not you who are to build the house for me to dwell in. 5 For I have never dwelt in a house, from the day I brought Israel up, even to this day, but I have been lodging in tent or tabernacle. 6 As long as I have wandered about with all Israel, did I ever say a word to any of the judges of Israel whom I commanded to shepherd my people, Why have you not built me a house of cedar? 7 Now then, speak thus to my servant David, Thus says the Lord of hosts: I took you from the pasture, from following the flock, to become ruler over my people Israel. 
    8: I was with you wherever you went, and I cut down all your enemies before you. I will make your name like that of the greatest on the earth. 
    9:  will assign a place for my people Israel and I will plant them in it to dwell there; they will never again be disturbed, nor shall the wicked ever again oppress them, as they did at the beginning, 
    10: and during all the time when I appointed judges over my people Israel. And I will subdue all your enemies. Moreover, I declare to you that the Lord will build you a house: 
    11: when your days have been completed and you must join your ancestors, I will raise up your offspring after you who will be one of your own sons, and I will establish his kingdom. 
    12: He it is who shall build me a house, and I will establish his throne forever. 
    13: I will be a father to him, and he shall be a son to me, and I will not withdraw my favor from him as I withdrew it from the one who was before you; 
    14: but I will maintain him in my house and in my kingdom forever, and his throne shall be firmly established forever.

    15: In accordance with all these words and this whole vision Nathan spoke to David.
David’s Thanksgiving. 
    16: 
    17: The Oracle of Nathan. 1 After David had taken up residence in his house, he said to Nathan the prophet, “See, I am living in a house of cedar, but the ark of the covenant of the Lord is under tentcloth.” 2 Nathan replied to David, “Whatever is in your heart, go and do, for God is with you.”
3 But that same night the word of God came to Nathan: 4 Go and tell David my servant, Thus says the Lord: It is not you who are to build the house for me to dwell in. 5 For I have never dwelt in a house, from the day I brought Israel up, even to this day, but I have been lodging in tent or tabernacle. 6 As long as I have wandered about with all Israel, did I ever say a word to any of the judges of Israel whom I commanded to shepherd my people, Why have you not built me a house of cedar? 7 Now then, speak thus to my servant David, Thus says the Lord of hosts: I took you from the pasture, from following the flock, to become ruler over my people Israel. 8 I was with you wherever you went, and I cut down all your enemies before you. I will make your name like that of the greatest on the earth. 9 I will assign a place for my people Israel and I will plant them in it to dwell there; they will never again be disturbed, nor shall the wicked ever again oppress them, as they did at the beginning, 10 and during all the time when I appointed judges over my people Israel. And I will subdue all your enemies. Moreover, I declare to you that the Lord will build you a house: 11 when your days have been completed and you must join your ancestors, I will raise up your offspring after you who will be one of your own sons, and I will establish his kingdom. 12 He it is who shall build me a house, and I will establish his throne forever. 13 I will be a father to him, and he shall be a son to me, and I will not withdraw my favor from him as I withdrew it from the one who was before you; 14 but I will maintain him in my house and in my kingdom forever, and his throne shall be firmly established forever.
15 In accordance with all these words and this whole vision Nathan spoke to David.
David’s Thanksgiving. 16 Then King David came in and sat in the Lord’s presence, and said: “Who am I, Lord God, and what is my house, that you should have brought me so far? 17 And yet, even this is too little in your sight, O God! For you have made a promise regarding your servant’s house reaching into the future, and you have looked on me as henceforth the most notable of men, Lord God. 
    18: What more can David say to you? You have known your servant. 
    19: Lord, for your servant’s sake and in keeping with your purpose, you have done this great thing. 
    20: Lord, there is no one like you, no God but you, just as we have always heard.

    21: “Is there, like your people Israel, whom you redeemed from Egypt, another nation on earth whom a god went to redeem as his people? You won for yourself a name for great and awesome deeds by driving out the nations before your people. 
    22: You made your people Israel your own forever, and you, Lord, became their God. 
    23: Now, Lord, may the promise that you have spoken concerning your servant and his house remain firm forever. Bring about what you have promised, 
    24: that your name, Lord of hosts, God of Israel, may be great and abide forever, while the house of your servant is established in your presence.

    25: “Because you, my God, have revealed to your servant that you will build him a house, your servant dares to pray before you. 
    26: Since you, Lord, are truly God and have made this generous promise to your servant, 
    27: do, then, bless the house of your servant, that it may be in your presence forever—since it is you, Lord, who blessed it, it is blessed forever.”


  Chapter 18.

    1: 
David’s Victories. 1 After this, David defeated the Philistines and subdued them; and he took Gath and its towns away from the Philistines. 
    2: He also defeated Moab, and the Moabites became David’s subjects, paying tribute.

    3: David then defeated Hadadezer, king of Zobah, toward Hamath, who was on his way to set up his victory stele at the river Euphrates. 
    4: David captured from him one thousand chariots, seven thousand horsemen, and twenty thousand foot soldiers. David hamstrung all the chariot horses, but left one hundred for his chariots. 
    5: The Arameans of Damascus came to help Hadadezer, king of Zobah, but David also defeated twenty-two thousand of their men in Aram. 
    6: Then David set up garrisons in the Damascus region of Aram, and the Arameans became David’s subjects, paying tribute. Thus the Lord made David victorious in all his campaigns.

    7: 
    8: David’s Victories. 1 After this, David defeated the Philistines and subdued them; and he took Gath and its towns away from the Philistines. 2 He also defeated Moab, and the Moabites became David’s subjects, paying tribute.
3 David then defeated Hadadezer, king of Zobah, toward Hamath, who was on his way to set up his victory stele at the river Euphrates. 4 David captured from him one thousand chariots, seven thousand horsemen, and twenty thousand foot soldiers. David hamstrung all the chariot horses, but left one hundred for his chariots. 5 The Arameans of Damascus came to help Hadadezer, king of Zobah, but David also defeated twenty-two thousand of their men in Aram. 6 Then David set up garrisons in the Damascus region of Aram, and the Arameans became David’s subjects, paying tribute. Thus the Lord made David victorious in all his campaigns.
7 David took the golden shields that were carried by Hadadezer’s attendants and brought them to Jerusalem. 8 David likewise took away from Tibhath and Cun, cities of Hadadezer, large quantities of bronze; Solomon later used it to make the bronze sea and the pillars and the vessels of bronze.

    9: hen Tou, king of Hamath, heard that David had defeated the entire army of Hadadezer, king of Zobah, 
    10: he sent his son Hadoram to wish King David well and to congratulate him on having waged a victorious war against Hadadezer; for Hadadezer had been at war with Tou. He also brought gold, silver and bronze articles of every sort. 
    11: These also King David consecrated to the Lord along with all the silver and gold that he had taken from the nations: from Edom, Moab, the Ammonites, the Philistines, and Amalek.

    12: Abishai, the son of Zeruiah, also defeated eighteen thousand Edomites in the Valley of Salt. 
    13: He set up garrisons in Edom, and all the Edomites became David’s subjects. Thus the Lord brought David victory in all his undertakings.
David’s Officials. 
    14: David was king over all Israel; he dispensed justice and right to all his people. 
    15: Joab, son of Zeruiah, was in command of the army; Jehoshaphat, son of Ahilud, was chancellor; 
    16: Zadok, son of Ahitub, and Ahimelech, son of Abiathar, were priests; Shavsha was scribe; 
    17: 
    18: David’s Victories. 1 After this, David defeated the Philistines and subdued them; and he took Gath and its towns away from the Philistines. 2 He also defeated Moab, and the Moabites became David’s subjects, paying tribute.
3 David then defeated Hadadezer, king of Zobah, toward Hamath, who was on his way to set up his victory stele at the river Euphrates. 4 David captured from him one thousand chariots, seven thousand horsemen, and twenty thousand foot soldiers. David hamstrung all the chariot horses, but left one hundred for his chariots. 5 The Arameans of Damascus came to help Hadadezer, king of Zobah, but David also defeated twenty-two thousand of their men in Aram. 6 Then David set up garrisons in the Damascus region of Aram, and the Arameans became David’s subjects, paying tribute. Thus the Lord made David victorious in all his campaigns.
7 David took the golden shields that were carried by Hadadezer’s attendants and brought them to Jerusalem. 8 David likewise took away from Tibhath and Cun, cities of Hadadezer, large quantities of bronze; Solomon later used it to make the bronze sea and the pillars and the vessels of bronze.
9 When Tou, king of Hamath, heard that David had defeated the entire army of Hadadezer, king of Zobah, 10 he sent his son Hadoram to wish King David well and to congratulate him on having waged a victorious war against Hadadezer; for Hadadezer had been at war with Tou. He also brought gold, silver and bronze articles of every sort. 11 These also King David consecrated to the Lord along with all the silver and gold that he had taken from the nations: from Edom, Moab, the Ammonites, the Philistines, and Amalek.
12 Abishai, the son of Zeruiah, also defeated eighteen thousand Edomites in the Valley of Salt. 13 He set up garrisons in Edom, and all the Edomites became David’s subjects. Thus the Lord brought David victory in all his undertakings.
David’s Officials. 14 David was king over all Israel; he dispensed justice and right to all his people. 15 Joab, son of Zeruiah, was in command of the army; Jehoshaphat, son of Ahilud, was chancellor; 16 Zadok, son of Ahitub, and Ahimelech, son of Abiathar, were priests; Shavsha was scribe; 17 Benaiah, son of Jehoiada, was in command of the Cherethites and the Pelethites; and David’s sons were the chief assistants to the king.[b]


  Chapter 19.

    1: 
Campaigns Against Ammon. 1 Afterward Nahash, king of the Ammonites, died and his son succeeded him as king. 
    2: David said, “I will show kindness to Hanun, the son of Nahash, for his father showed kindness to me.” Therefore he sent envoys to console him over his father. But when David’s servants had entered the land of the Ammonites to console Hanun, 
    3: the Ammonite princes said to Hanun, “Do you think David is doing this—sending you these consolers—to honor your father? Have not his servants rather come to you to explore the land, spying it out for its overthrow?” 
    4: So Hanun seized David’s servants and had them shaved and their garments cut off halfway at the hips. Then he sent them away. 
    5: David was told about the men, and he sent word for them to be intercepted, for the men had been greatly disgraced. “Remain at Jericho,” the king told them, “until your beards have grown again; then come back here.”

    6: When the Ammonites realized that they had put themselves in bad odor with David, Hanun and the Ammonites sent a thousand talents of silver to hire chariots and horsemen from Aram Naharaim, from Aram-maacah, and from Zobah. 
    7: They hired thirty-two thousand chariots along with the king of Maacah and his army, who came and encamped before Medeba. The Ammonites also assembled from their cities and came out for war.

    8: 
    9: ampaigns Against Ammon. 1 Afterward Nahash, king of the Ammonites, died and his son succeeded him as king. 2 David said, “I will show kindness to Hanun, the son of Nahash, for his father showed kindness to me.” Therefore he sent envoys to console him over his father. But when David’s servants had entered the land of the Ammonites to console Hanun, 3 the Ammonite princes said to Hanun, “Do you think David is doing this—sending you these consolers—to honor your father? Have not his servants rather come to you to explore the land, spying it out for its overthrow?” 4 So Hanun seized David’s servants and had them shaved and their garments cut off halfway at the hips. Then he sent them away. 5 David was told about the men, and he sent word for them to be intercepted, for the men had been greatly disgraced. “Remain at Jericho,” the king told them, “until your beards have grown again; then come back here.”
6 When the Ammonites realized that they had put themselves in bad odor with David, Hanun and the Ammonites sent a thousand talents of silver to hire chariots and horsemen from Aram Naharaim, from Aram-maacah, and from Zobah. 7 They hired thirty-two thousand chariots along with the king of Maacah and his army, who came and encamped before Medeba. The Ammonites also assembled from their cities and came out for war.
8 When David heard of this, he sent Joab and his whole army of warriors against them. 9 The Ammonites marched out and lined up for battle at the entrance of the city, while the kings who had come to their help remained apart in the open field. 
    10: When Joab saw that there was a battle line both in front of and behind him, he chose some of the best fighters among the Israelites and lined them up against the Arameans; 
    11: the rest of the army, which he placed under the command of his brother Abishai, then lined up to oppose the Ammonites. 
    12: And he said: “If the Arameans prove too strong for me, you must come and save me; and if the Ammonites prove too strong for you, I will save you. 
    13: Hold firm and let us show ourselves courageous for the sake of our people and the cities of our God; and may the Lord do what is good in his sight.” 
    14: Joab therefore advanced with his men to engage the Arameans in battle; but they fled before him. 
    15: And when the Ammonites saw that the Arameans had fled, they too fled before his brother Abishai, and entered their city. Joab then came to Jerusalem.

    16: Seeing themselves vanquished by Israel, the Arameans sent messengers to bring out the Arameans from beyond the Euphrates, with Shophach, the commander of Hadadezer’s army, at their head. 
    17: When this was reported to David, he gathered all Israel together, crossed the Jordan, and met them. With the army of David drawn up to fight the Arameans, they gave battle. 
    18: 
    19: Campaigns Against Ammon. 1 Afterward Nahash, king of the Ammonites, died and his son succeeded him as king. 2 David said, “I will show kindness to Hanun, the son of Nahash, for his father showed kindness to me.” Therefore he sent envoys to console him over his father. But when David’s servants had entered the land of the Ammonites to console Hanun, 3 the Ammonite princes said to Hanun, “Do you think David is doing this—sending you these consolers—to honor your father? Have not his servants rather come to you to explore the land, spying it out for its overthrow?” 4 So Hanun seized David’s servants and had them shaved and their garments cut off halfway at the hips. Then he sent them away. 5 David was told about the men, and he sent word for them to be intercepted, for the men had been greatly disgraced. “Remain at Jericho,” the king told them, “until your beards have grown again; then come back here.”
6 When the Ammonites realized that they had put themselves in bad odor with David, Hanun and the Ammonites sent a thousand talents of silver to hire chariots and horsemen from Aram Naharaim, from Aram-maacah, and from Zobah. 7 They hired thirty-two thousand chariots along with the king of Maacah and his army, who came and encamped before Medeba. The Ammonites also assembled from their cities and came out for war.
8 When David heard of this, he sent Joab and his whole army of warriors against them. 9 The Ammonites marched out and lined up for battle at the entrance of the city, while the kings who had come to their help remained apart in the open field. 10 When Joab saw that there was a battle line both in front of and behind him, he chose some of the best fighters among the Israelites and lined them up against the Arameans; 11 the rest of the army, which he placed under the command of his brother Abishai, then lined up to oppose the Ammonites. 12 And he said: “If the Arameans prove too strong for me, you must come and save me; and if the Ammonites prove too strong for you, I will save you. 13 Hold firm and let us show ourselves courageous for the sake of our people and the cities of our God; and may the Lord do what is good in his sight.” 14 Joab therefore advanced with his men to engage the Arameans in battle; but they fled before him. 15 And when the Ammonites saw that the Arameans had fled, they too fled before his brother Abishai, and entered their city. Joab then came to Jerusalem.
16 Seeing themselves vanquished by Israel, the Arameans sent messengers to bring out the Arameans from beyond the Euphrates, with Shophach, the commander of Hadadezer’s army, at their head. 17 When this was reported to David, he gathered all Israel together, crossed the Jordan, and met them. With the army of David drawn up to fight the Arameans, they gave battle. 18 But the Arameans fled before Israel, and David killed seven thousand of their chariot fighters and forty thousand of their foot soldiers; he also put to death Shophach, the commander of the army. 19 When the vassals of Hadadezer saw themselves vanquished by Israel, they made peace with David and became his subjects. After this, the Arameans refused to come to the aid of the Ammonites.
New American Bible (Revised Edition) (NABRE)
Scripture texts, prefaces, introductions, footnotes and cross references used in this work are taken from the New American Bible, revised edition © 
    20: 0, 1991, 1986, 1970 Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, DC All Rights Reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the copyright owner.

  Chapter 20.

    1: 
    2: 
1 At the turn of the year, the time when kings go to war, Joab led the army out in force, laid waste the land of the Ammonites, and went on to besiege Rabbah; David himself remained in Jerusalem. When Joab had attacked Rabbah and destroyed it, 2 David took the crown of Milcom from the idol’s head. It was found to weigh a talent of gold, with precious stones on it; this crown David wore on his own head. He also brought out a great amount of spoil from the city. 
    3: He deported the people of the city and set them to work with saws, iron picks, and axes. David dealt thus with all the cities of the Ammonites. Then David and his whole army returned to Jerusalem.
Victories over the Philistines. 
    4: Afterward there was another battle with the Philistines, at Gezer. At that time, Sibbecai the Hushathite struck down Sippai, one of the descendants of the Rephaim, and the Philistines were subdued.

    5: There was another battle with the Philistines, and Elhanan, the son of Jair, slew Lahmi, the brother of Goliath of Gath, whose spear shaft was like a weaver’s beam.

    6: There was another battle, at Gath, and there was a giant, who had six fingers to each hand and six toes to each foot; twenty-four in all. He too was descended from the Rephaim. 
    7: He defied Israel, and Jonathan, the son of Shimea, David’s brother, slew him. 
    8: These were the descendants of the Rephaim of Gath who died at the hands of David and his servants.


End of day 93.