Day 286:

Reading Matthew, chapters ['13', '14', '15', '16']:

  Chapter 13.

    1: 
The Parable of the Sower. 1 On that day, Jesus went out of the house and sat down by the sea. 
    2: 
    3: The Parable of the Sower. 1 On that day, Jesus went out of the house and sat down by the sea. 2 Such large crowds gathered around him that he got into a boat and sat down, and the whole crowd stood along the shore. 3 [b]And he spoke to them at length in parables,[c] saying: “A sower went out to sow. 
    4: And as he sowed, some seed fell on the path, and birds came and ate it up. 
    5: Some fell on rocky ground, where it had little soil. It sprang up at once because the soil was not deep, 
    6: and when the sun rose it was scorched, and it withered for lack of roots. 
    7: Some seed fell among thorns, and the thorns grew up and choked it. 
    8: But some seed fell on rich soil, and produced fruit, a hundred or sixty or thirtyfold. 
    9: hoever has ears ought to hear.”
The Purpose of Parables. 
    10: The disciples approached him and said, “Why do you speak to them in parables?” 
    11: He said to them in reply, “Because knowledge of the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven has been granted to you, but to them it has not been granted. 
    12: 
    13: The Parable of the Sower. 1 On that day, Jesus went out of the house and sat down by the sea. 2 Such large crowds gathered around him that he got into a boat and sat down, and the whole crowd stood along the shore. 3 [b]And he spoke to them at length in parables,[c] saying: “A sower went out to sow. 4 And as he sowed, some seed fell on the path, and birds came and ate it up. 5 Some fell on rocky ground, where it had little soil. It sprang up at once because the soil was not deep, 6 and when the sun rose it was scorched, and it withered for lack of roots. 7 Some seed fell among thorns, and the thorns grew up and choked it. 8 But some seed fell on rich soil, and produced fruit, a hundred or sixty or thirtyfold. 9 Whoever has ears ought to hear.”
The Purpose of Parables. 10 The disciples approached him and said, “Why do you speak to them in parables?” 11 [d]He said to them in reply, “Because knowledge of the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven has been granted to you, but to them it has not been granted. 12 To anyone who has, more will be given[e] and he will grow rich; from anyone who has not, even what he has will be taken away. 13 [f]This is why I speak to them in parables, because ‘they look but do not see and hear but do not listen or understand.’ 
    14: Isaiah’s prophecy is fulfilled in them, which says:
‘You shall indeed hear but not understand,
    you shall indeed look but never see.

    15: 
Gross is the heart of this people,
    they will hardly hear with their ears,
    they have closed their eyes,
        lest they see with their eyes
    and hear with their ears
and understand with their heart and be converted,
    and I heal them.’
The Privilege of Discipleship. 
    16: “But blessed are your eyes, because they see, and your ears, because they hear. 
    17: Amen, I say to you, many prophets and righteous people longed to see what you see but did not see it, and to hear what you hear but did not hear it.
The Explanation of the Parable of the Sower. 
    18: “Hear then the parable of the sower. 
    19: The seed sown on the path is the one who hears the word of the kingdom without understanding it, and the evil one comes and steals away what was sown in his heart. 
    20: The seed sown on rocky ground is the one who hears the word and receives it at once with joy. 
    21: But he has no root and lasts only for a time. When some tribulation or persecution comes because of the word, he immediately falls away. 
    22: The seed sown among thorns is the one who hears the word, but then worldly anxiety and the lure of riches choke the word and it bears no fruit. 
    23: But the seed sown on rich soil is the one who hears the word and understands it, who indeed bears fruit and yields a hundred or sixty or thirtyfold.”
The Parable of the Weeds Among the Wheat. 
    24: He proposed another parable to them. “The kingdom of heaven may be likened to a man who sowed good seed in his field. 
    25: While everyone was asleep his enemy came and sowed weeds all through the wheat, and then went off. 
    26: When the crop grew and bore fruit, the weeds appeared as well. 
    27: The slaves of the householder came to him and said, ‘Master, did you not sow good seed in your field? Where have the weeds come from?’ 
    28: He answered, ‘An enemy has done this.’ His slaves said to him, ‘Do you want us to go and pull them up?’ 
    29: He replied, ‘No, if you pull up the weeds you might uproot the wheat along with them. 
    30: Let them grow together until harvest; then at harvest time I will say to the harvesters, “First collect the weeds and tie them in bundles for burning; but gather the wheat into my barn.”’”
The Parable of the Mustard Seed.[l] 
    31: He proposed another parable to them. “The kingdom of heaven is like a mustard seed that a person took and sowed in a field. 
    32: It is the smallest of all the seeds, yet when full-grown it is the largest of plants. It becomes a large bush, and the ‘birds of the sky come and dwell in its branches.’”
The Parable of the Yeast. 
    33: He spoke to them another parable. “The kingdom of heaven is like yeast that a woman took and mixed with three measures of wheat flour until the whole batch was leavened.”
The Use of Parables. 
    34: All these things Jesus spoke to the crowds in parables. He spoke to them only in parables, 
    35: to fulfill what had been said through the prophet:
“I will open my mouth in parables,
    I will announce what has lain hidden from the foundation [of the world].”
The Explanation of the Parable of the Weeds. 
    36: Then, dismissing the crowds, he went into the house. His disciples approached him and said, “Explain to us the parable of the weeds in the field.” 
    37: He said in reply, “He who sows good seed is the Son of Man, 
    38: the field is the world, the good seed the children of the kingdom. The weeds are the children of the evil one, 
    39: and the enemy who sows them is the devil. The harvest is the end of the age, and the harvesters are angels. 
    40: Just as weeds are collected and burned  with fire, so will it be at the end of the age. 
    41: The Son of Man will send his angels, and they will collect out of his kingdom all who cause others to sin and all evildoers. 
    42: They will throw them into the fiery furnace, where there will be wailing and grinding of teeth. 
    43: Then the righteous will shine like the sun in the kingdom of their Father. Whoever has ears ought to hear.
More Parables.[w] 
    44: “The kingdom of heaven is like a treasure buried in a field, which a person finds and hides again, and out of joy goes and sells all that he has and buys that field. 
    45: Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a merchant searching for fine pearls. 
    46: When he finds a pearl of great price, he goes and sells all that he has and buys it. 
    47: Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a net thrown into the sea, which collects fish of every kind. 
    48: When it is full they haul it ashore and sit down to put what is good into buckets. What is bad they throw away. 
    49: Thus it will be at the end of the age. The angels will go out and separate the wicked from the righteous 
    50: and throw them into the fiery furnace, where there will be wailing and grinding of teeth.
Treasures New and Old. 
    51: “Do you understand all these things?” They answered, “Yes.” 
    52: And he replied, “Then every scribe who has been instructed in the kingdom of heaven is like the head of a household who brings from his storeroom both the new and the old.” 
    53: When Jesus finished these parables, he went away from there.
V. Jesus, the Kingdom, and the Church
The Rejection at Nazareth. 
    54: He came to his native place and taught the people in their synagogue. They were astonished[ab] and said, “Where did this man get such wisdom and mighty deeds? 
    55: Is he not the carpenter’s son? Is not his mother named Mary and his brothers James, Joseph, Simon, and Judas? 
    56: Are not his sisters all with us? Where did this man get all this?” 
    57: And they took offense at him. But Jesus said to them, “A prophet is not without honor except in his native place and in his own house.” 
    58: And he did not work many mighty deeds there because of their lack of faith.


  Chapter 14.

    1: 
Herod’s Opinion of Jesus. 1 At that time Herod the tetrarch[b] heard of the reputation of Jesus 
    2: and said to his servants, “This man is John the Baptist. He has been raised from the dead; that is why mighty powers are at work in him.”
The Death of John the Baptist. 
    3: 
    4: Herod’s Opinion of Jesus. 1 At that time Herod the tetrarch[b] heard of the reputation of Jesus 2 and said to his servants, “This man is John the Baptist. He has been raised from the dead; that is why mighty powers are at work in him.”
The Death of John the Baptist. 3 Now Herod had arrested John, bound [him], and put him in prison on account of Herodias,[c] the wife of his brother Philip, 4 for John had said to him, “It is not lawful for you to have her.” 
    5: Although he wanted to kill him, he feared the people, for they regarded him as a prophet. 
    6: But at a birthday celebration for Herod, the daughter of Herodias performed a dance before the guests and delighted Herod 
    7: so much that he swore to give her whatever she might ask for. 
    8: Prompted by her mother, she said, “Give me here on a platter the head of John the Baptist.” 
    9: he king was distressed, but because of his oaths and the guests who were present, he ordered that it be given, 
    10: and he had John beheaded in the prison. 
    11: His head was brought in on a platter and given to the girl, who took it to her mother. 
    12: His disciples came and took away the corpse and buried him; and they went and told Jesus.
The Return of the Twelve and the Feeding of the Five Thousand. 
    13: 
    14: Herod’s Opinion of Jesus. 1 At that time Herod the tetrarch[b] heard of the reputation of Jesus 2 and said to his servants, “This man is John the Baptist. He has been raised from the dead; that is why mighty powers are at work in him.”
The Death of John the Baptist. 3 Now Herod had arrested John, bound [him], and put him in prison on account of Herodias,[c] the wife of his brother Philip, 4 for John had said to him, “It is not lawful for you to have her.” 5 Although he wanted to kill him, he feared the people, for they regarded him as a prophet. 6 But at a birthday celebration for Herod, the daughter of Herodias performed a dance before the guests and delighted Herod 7 so much that he swore to give her whatever she might ask for. 8 Prompted by her mother, she said, “Give me here on a platter the head of John the Baptist.” 9 The king was distressed, but because of his oaths and the guests who were present, he ordered that it be given, 10 and he had John beheaded in the prison. 11 His head was brought in on a platter and given to the girl, who took it to her mother. 12 His disciples came and took away the corpse and buried him; and they went and told Jesus.
The Return of the Twelve and the Feeding of the Five Thousand.[d] 13 When Jesus heard of it, he withdrew in a boat to a deserted place by himself. The crowds heard of this and followed him on foot from their towns. 14 When he disembarked and saw the vast crowd, his heart was moved with pity for them, and he cured their sick. 
    15: When it was evening, the disciples approached him and said, “This is a deserted place and it is already late; dismiss the crowds so that they can go to the villages and buy food for themselves.” 
    16:  said to them, “There is no need for them to go away; give them some food yourselves.” 
    17: But they said to him, “Five loaves and two fish are all we have here.” 
    18: Then he said, “Bring them here to me,” 
    19: and he ordered the crowds to sit down on the grass. Taking the five loaves and the two fish, and looking up to heaven, he said the blessing, broke the loaves, and gave them to the disciples, who in turn gave them to the crowds. 
    20: They all ate and were satisfied, and they picked up the fragments left over—twelve wicker baskets full. 
    21: Those who ate were about five thousand men, not counting women and children.
The Walking on the Water. 
    22: Then he made the disciples get into the boat and precede him to the other side, while he dismissed the crowds. 
    23: After doing so, he went up on the mountain by himself to pray. When it was evening he was there alone. 
    24: Meanwhile the boat, already a few miles offshore, was being tossed about by the waves, for the wind was against it. 
    25: During the fourth watch of the night, he came toward them, walking on the sea. 
    26: When the disciples saw him walking on the sea they were terrified. “It is a ghost,” they said, and they cried out in fear. 
    27: At once  spoke to them, “Take courage, it is I;[i] do not be afraid.” 
    28: Peter said to him in reply, “Lord, if it is you, command me to come to you on the water.” 
    29: He said, “Come.” Peter got out of the boat and began to walk on the water toward Jesus. 
    30: But when he saw how  the wind was he became frightened; and, beginning to sink, he cried out, “Lord, save me!” 
    31: Immediately Jesus stretched out his hand and caught him, and said to him, “O you of little faith, why did you doubt?” 
    32: After they got into the boat, the wind died down. 
    33: Those who were in the boat did him homage, saying, “Truly, you are the Son of God.”
The Healings at Gennesaret. 
    34: After making the crossing, they came to land at Gennesaret. 
    35: When the men of that place recognized him, they sent word to all the surrounding country. People brought to him all those who were sick 
    36: and begged him that they might touch only the tassel on his cloak, and as many as touched it were healed.


  Chapter 15.

    1: 
The Tradition of the Elders. 1 Then Pharisees and scribes came to Jesus from Jerusalem and said, 
    2: “Why do your disciples break the tradition of the elders? They do not wash [their] hands when they eat a meal.” 
    3: He said to them in reply, “And why do you break the commandment of God for the sake of your tradition? 
    4: 
    5: The Tradition of the Elders. 1 Then Pharisees and scribes came to Jesus from Jerusalem and said, 2 “Why do your disciples break the tradition of the elders?[b] They do not wash [their] hands when they eat a meal.” 3 He said to them in reply, “And why do you break the commandment of God[c] for the sake of your tradition? 4 For God said, ‘Honor your father and your mother,’ and ‘Whoever curses father or mother shall die.’ 5 [d]But you say, ‘Whoever says to father or mother, “Any support you might have had from me is dedicated to God,” 
    6: need not honor his father.’ You have nullified the word of God for the sake of your tradition. 
    7: Hypocrites, well did Isaiah prophesy about you when he said:

    8: 
‘This people honors me with their lips,
    but their hearts are far from me;

    9: in vain do they worship me,
    teaching as doctrines human precepts.’”

    10: He summoned the crowd and said to them, “Hear and understand. 
    11: It is not what enters one’s mouth that defiles that person; but what comes out of the mouth is what defiles one.” 
    12: Then his disciples approached and said to him, “Do you know that the Pharisees took offense when they heard what you said?” 
    13: He said in reply, “Every plant that my heavenly Father has not planted will be uprooted. 
    14: 
    15: The Tradition of the Elders. 1 Then Pharisees and scribes came to Jesus from Jerusalem and said, 2 “Why do your disciples break the tradition of the elders?[b] They do not wash [their] hands when they eat a meal.” 3 He said to them in reply, “And why do you break the commandment of God[c] for the sake of your tradition? 4 For God said, ‘Honor your father and your mother,’ and ‘Whoever curses father or mother shall die.’ 5 [d]But you say, ‘Whoever says to father or mother, “Any support you might have had from me is dedicated to God,” 6 need not honor his father.’ You have nullified the word of God for the sake of your tradition. 7 Hypocrites, well did Isaiah prophesy about you when he said:
8 
‘This people honors me with their lips,[e]
    but their hearts are far from me;
9 
in vain do they worship me,
    teaching as doctrines human precepts.’”
10 He summoned the crowd and said to them, “Hear and understand. 11 It is not what enters one’s mouth that defiles that person; but what comes out of the mouth is what defiles one.” 12 Then his disciples approached and said to him, “Do you know that the Pharisees took offense when they heard what you said?” 13 He said in reply,[f] “Every plant that my heavenly Father has not planted will be uprooted. 14 Let them alone; they are blind guides (of the blind). If a blind person leads a blind person, both will fall into a pit.” 15 Then Peter[g] said to him in reply, “Explain [this] parable to us.” 
    16: He said to them, “Are even you still without understanding? 
    17: Do you not realize that everything that enters the mouth passes into the stomach and is expelled into the latrine? 
    18: But the things that come out of the mouth come from the heart, and they defile. 
    19: For from the heart come evil thoughts, murder, adultery, unchastity, theft, false witness, blasphemy. 
    20: These are what defile a person, but to eat with unwashed hands does not defile.”
The Canaanite Woman’s Faith. 
    21: Then Jesus went from that place and withdrew to the region of Tyre and Sidon. 
    22: And behold, a Canaanite woman of that district came and called out, “Have pity on me, Lord, Son of David! My daughter is tormented by a demon.” 
    23: But he did not say a word in answer to her. His disciples came and asked him, “Send her away, for she keeps calling out after us.” 
    24: He said in reply, “I was sent only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.” 
    25: But the woman came and did him homage, saying, “Lord, help me.” 
    26: He said in reply, “It is not right to take the food of the children and throw it to the dogs.” 
    27: She said, “Please, Lord, for even the dogs eat the scraps that fall from the table of their masters.” 
    28: Then Jesus said to her in reply, “O woman, great is your faith! Let it be done for you as you wish.” And her daughter was healed from that hour.
The Healing of Many People. 
    29: Moving on from there Jesus walked by the Sea of Galilee, went up on the mountain, and sat down there. 
    30: Great crowds came to him, having with them the lame, the blind, the deformed, the mute, and many others. They placed them at his feet, and he cured them. 
    31: The crowds were amazed when they saw the mute speaking, the deformed made whole, the lame walking, and the blind able to see, and they glorified the God of Israel.
The Feeding of the Four Thousand. 
    32: Jesus summoned his disciples and said, “My heart is moved with pity for the crowd, for they have been with me now for three days and have nothing to eat. I do not want to send them away hungry, for fear they may collapse on the way.” 
    33: The disciples said to him, “Where could we ever get enough bread in this deserted place to satisfy such a crowd?” 
    34: Jesus said to them, “How many loaves do you have?” “Seven,” they replied, “and a few fish.” 
    35: He ordered the crowd to sit down on the ground. 
    36: Then he took the seven loaves and the fish, gave thanks, broke the loaves, and gave them to the disciples, who in turn gave them to the crowds. 
    37: They all ate and were satisfied. They picked up the fragments left over—seven baskets full. 
    38: Those who ate were four thousand men, not counting women and children. 
    39: And when he had dismissed the crowds, he got into the boat and came to the district of Magadan.


  Chapter 16.

    1: 
The Demand for a Sign. 1 The Pharisees and Sadducees came and, to test him, asked him to show them a sign from heaven. 
    2: He said to them in reply, “[In the evening you say, ‘Tomorrow will be fair, for the sky is red’; 
    3: and, in the morning, ‘Today will be stormy, for the sky is red and threatening.’ You know how to judge the appearance of the sky, but you cannot judge the signs of the times.] 
    4: An evil and unfaithful generation seeks a sign, but no sign will be given it except the sign of Jonah.” Then he left them and went away.
The Leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees. 
    5: 
    6: The Demand for a Sign. 1 The Pharisees and Sadducees came and, to test him, asked him to show them a sign from heaven. 2 [b]He said to them in reply, “[In the evening you say, ‘Tomorrow will be fair, for the sky is red’; 3 and, in the morning, ‘Today will be stormy, for the sky is red and threatening.’ You know how to judge the appearance of the sky, but you cannot judge the signs of the times.] 4 An evil and unfaithful generation seeks a sign, but no sign will be given it except the sign of Jonah.”[c] Then he left them and went away.
The Leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees. 5 In coming to the other side of the sea,[d] the disciples had forgotten to bring bread. 6 Jesus said to them, “Look out, and beware of the leaven[e] of the Pharisees and Sadducees.” 
    7: They concluded among themselves, saying, “It is because we have brought no bread.” 
    8: When Jesus became aware of this he said, “You of little faith, why do you conclude among yourselves that it is because you have no bread? 
    9: o you not yet understand, and do you not remember the five loaves for the five thousand, and how many wicker baskets you took up? 
    10: Or the seven loaves for the four thousand, and how many baskets you took up? 
    11: How do you not comprehend that I was not speaking to you about bread? Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.” 
    12: Then they understood that he was not telling them to beware of the leaven of bread, but of the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
Peter’s Confession About Jesus.[h] 
    13: When Jesus went into the region of Caesarea Philippi he asked his disciples, “Who do people say that the Son of Man is?” 
    14: They replied, “Some say John the Baptist, others Elijah, still others Jeremiah or one of the prophets.” 
    15: 
    16: The Demand for a Sign. 1 The Pharisees and Sadducees came and, to test him, asked him to show them a sign from heaven. 2 [b]He said to them in reply, “[In the evening you say, ‘Tomorrow will be fair, for the sky is red’; 3 and, in the morning, ‘Today will be stormy, for the sky is red and threatening.’ You know how to judge the appearance of the sky, but you cannot judge the signs of the times.] 4 An evil and unfaithful generation seeks a sign, but no sign will be given it except the sign of Jonah.”[c] Then he left them and went away.
The Leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees. 5 In coming to the other side of the sea,[d] the disciples had forgotten to bring bread. 6 Jesus said to them, “Look out, and beware of the leaven[e] of the Pharisees and Sadducees.” 7 [f]They concluded among themselves, saying, “It is because we have brought no bread.” 8 When Jesus became aware of this he said, “You of little faith, why do you conclude among yourselves that it is because you have no bread? 9 Do you not yet understand, and do you not remember the five loaves for the five thousand, and how many wicker baskets you took up? 10 Or the seven loaves for the four thousand, and how many baskets you took up? 11 How do you not comprehend that I was not speaking to you about bread? Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.” 12 Then they understood[g] that he was not telling them to beware of the leaven of bread, but of the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
Peter’s Confession About Jesus.[h] 13 When Jesus went into the region of Caesarea Philippi[i] he asked his disciples, “Who do people say that the Son of Man is?” 14 They replied, “Some say John the Baptist,[j] others Elijah, still others Jeremiah or one of the prophets.” 15 He said to them, “But who do you say that I am?” 16 [k]Simon Peter said in reply, “You are the Messiah, the Son of the living God.” 
    17: Jesus said to him in reply, “Blessed are you, Simon son of Jonah. For flesh and blood has not revealed this to you, but my heavenly Father. 
    18: And so I say to you, you are Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church, and the gates of the netherworld shall not prevail against it. 
    19: I will give you the keys to the kingdom of heaven. Whatever you bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatever you loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.” 
    20: Then he strictly ordered his disciples to tell no one that he was the Messiah.
The First Prediction of the Passion.[p] 
    21: From that time on, Jesus began to show his disciples that he must go to Jerusalem and suffer greatly from the elders, the chief priests, and the scribes, and be killed and on the third day be raised. 
    22: Then Peter took him aside and began to rebuke him, “God forbid, Lord! No such thing shall ever happen to you.” 
    23: He turned and said to Peter, “Get behind me, Satan! You are an obstacle to me. You are thinking not as God does, but as human beings do.”
The Conditions of Discipleship. 
    24: Then Jesus said to his disciples, “Whoever wishes to come after me must deny himself, take up his cross, and follow me. 
    25: For whoever wishes to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for my sake will find it. 
    26: What profit would there be for one to gain the whole world and forfeit his life? Or what can one give in exchange for his life? 
    27: For the Son of Man will come with his angels in his Father’s glory, and then he will repay everyone according to his conduct. 
    28: Amen, I say to you, there are some standing here who will not taste death until they see the Son of Man coming in his kingdom.”


End of day 286.