Day 70:

Reading 2-Samuel, chapters ['1', '2', '3', '4']:

  Chapter 1.

    1: Report of Saul’s Death. 1 After the death of Saul, David returned from his victory over the Amalekites and stayed in Ziklag two days. 
    2: On the third day a man came from the field of battle, one of Saul’s people, with his garments torn and his head covered with dirt. Going to David, he fell to the ground in homage. 
    3: David asked him, “Where have you come from?” He replied, “From the Israelite camp: I have escaped.” 
    4: “What happened?” David said. “Tell me.” He answered that the soldiers had fled the battle and many of them had fallen and were dead; and that Saul and his son Jonathan were dead. 
    5: Then David said to the youth who was reporting to him, “How do you know that Saul and his son Jonathan are dead?” 
    6: The youth reporting to him replied: “I happened to find myself on Mount Gilboa and saw Saul leaning on his spear, with chariots and horsemen closing in on him. 
    7: He turned around and saw me, and called me to him. When I said, ‘Here I am,’ 
    8: he asked me, ‘Who are you?’ and I replied, ‘An Amalekite.’ 
    9: hen he said to me, ‘Stand over me, please, and put me to death, for I am in great suffering, but still alive.’ 
    10: So I stood over him and put him to death, for I knew that he could not survive his wound. I removed the crown from his head and the armlet from his arm and brought them here to my lord.”

    11: David seized his garments and tore them, and so did all the men who were with him. 
    12: They mourned and wept and fasted until evening for Saul and his son Jonathan, and for the people of the Lord and the house of Israel, because they had fallen by the sword. 
    13: David said to the youth who had reported to him, “Where are you from?” He replied, “I am the son of a resident alien, an Amalekite.” 
    14: David said to him, “How is it that you were not afraid to put forth your hand to desecrate the Lord’s anointed?” 
    15: David then called one of the attendants and said to him, “Come, strike him down”; so he struck him and he died. 
    16: David said to him, “Your blood is on your head, for you testified against yourself when you said, ‘I put the Lord’s anointed to death.’”
Lament for Saul and Jonathan. 
    17: Then David chanted this lament for Saul and his son Jonathan 
    18: (he commanded that it be taught to the Judahites; it is recorded in the Book of Jashar):

    19: 
Alas! the glory of Israel,
    slain upon your heights!
How can the warriors have fallen!

    20: 
Do not report it in Gath,
    as good news in Ashkelon’s streets,
Lest Philistine women rejoice,
    lest the women of the uncircumcised exult!

    21: 
O mountains of Gilboa,
    upon you be neither dew nor rain,
    nor surging from the deeps!
Defiled there the warriors’ shields,
    the shield of Saul—no longer anointed with oil!

    22: 
From the blood of the slain,
    from the bodies of the warriors,
The bow of Jonathan did not turn back,
    nor the sword of Saul return unstained.

    23: 
Saul and Jonathan, beloved and dear,
    separated neither in life nor death,
    swifter than eagles, stronger than lions!

    24: 
Women of Israel, weep over Saul,
    who clothed you in scarlet and in finery,
    covered your clothing with ornaments of gold.

    25: 
How can the warriors have fallen
    in the thick of battle!
    Jonathan—slain upon your heights!

    26: 
I grieve for you, Jonathan my brother!
    Most dear have you been to me;
More wondrous your love to me
    than the love of women.

    27: 
How can the warriors have fallen,
    the weapons of war have perished!


  Chapter 2.

    1: 
    2: David Is Anointed King. 1 After this, David inquired of the Lord, “Shall I go up into one of the cities of Judah?” The Lord replied to him: Go up. Then David asked, “Where shall I go?” He replied: To Hebron. 2 So David went up there, with his two wives, Ahinoam of Jezreel and Abigail, the wife of Nabal of Carmel. 
    3: David also brought up his men with their families, and they dwelt in the towns of Hebron. 
    4: Then the men of Judah came there and anointed David king over the house of Judah.
A report reached David that the people of Jabesh-gilead had buried Saul. 
    5: So David sent messengers to the people of Jabesh-gilead and said to them: “May you be blessed by the Lord for having done this kindness to your lord Saul in burying him. 
    6: And now may the Lord show you kindness and fidelity. For my part, I will show generosity to you for having done this. 
    7: So take courage and prove yourselves valiant, for though your lord Saul is dead, the house of Judah has anointed me king over them.”
IV. The Reign of David
Ishbaal King of Israel. 
    8: Abner, son of Ner, captain of Saul’s army, took Ishbaal, son of Saul, and brought him over to Mahanaim, 
    9: here he made him king over Gilead, the Asherites, Jezreel, Ephraim, Benjamin, and the rest of Israel. 
    10: Ishbaal, son of Saul, was forty years old when he became king over Israel, and he reigned two years; but the house of Judah followed David. 
    11: In all, David was king in Hebron over the house of Judah seven years and six months.
Combat near Gibeon. 
    12: Now Abner, son of Ner, and the servants of Ishbaal, Saul’s son, set out from Mahanaim for Gibeon. 
    13: Joab, son of Zeruiah, and the servants of David also set out and encountered them at the pool of Gibeon. And they sat down, one group on one side of the pool and the other on the opposite side. 
    14: Then Abner said to Joab, “Let the young men rise and perform for us.” Joab replied, “All right.” 
    15: So they rose and were counted off: twelve of the Benjaminites of Ishbaal, son of Saul, and twelve of David’s servants. 
    16: Then each one grasped his opponent’s head and thrust his sword into his opponent’s side, and they all fell down together. And so that place was named the Field of the Sides; it is in Gibeon.
Death of Asahel. 
    17: The battle that day was very fierce, and Abner and the men of Israel were defeated by David’s servants. 
    18: The three sons of Zeruiah were there—Joab, Abishai, and Asahel. Asahel, who was as fleet of foot as a gazelle in the open field, 
    19: set out after Abner, turning neither right nor left in his pursuit. 
    20: Abner turned around and said, “Is that you, Asahel?” He replied, “Yes.” 
    21: Abner said to him, “Turn right or left; seize one of the young men and take what you can strip from him.” But Asahel would not stop pursuing him. 
    22: Once more Abner said to Asahel: “Stop pursuing me! Why must I strike you to the ground? How could I show my face to your brother Joab?” 
    23: Still he refused to stop. So Abner struck him in the abdomen with the heel of his spear, and the weapon protruded from his back. He fell there and died on the spot. All who came to the place where Asahel had fallen and died, halted. 
    24: But Joab and Abishai continued the pursuit of Abner. The sun had gone down when they came to the hill of Ammah which lies east of the valley toward the wilderness near Geba.
Truce Between Joab and Abner. 
    25: Here the Benjaminites rallied around Abner, forming a single group, and made a stand on a hilltop. 
    26: Then Abner called to Joab and said: “Must the sword devour forever? Do you not know that afterward there will be bitterness? How long before you tell the people to stop pursuing their brothers?” 
    27: Joab replied, “As God lives, if you had not spoken, it would be morning before the people would be stopped from pursuing their brothers.” 
    28: Joab then sounded the horn, and all the people came to a halt, pursuing Israel no farther and fighting no more. 
    29: Abner and his men marched all night long through the Arabah, crossed the Jordan, marched all through the morning, and came to Mahanaim. 
    30: Joab, coming from the pursuit of Abner, assembled all the men. Nineteen other servants of David were missing, besides Asahel. 
    31: But David’s servants had struck down and killed three hundred and sixty men of Benjamin, followers of Abner. 
    32: They took up Asahel and buried him in his father’s tomb in Bethlehem. Joab and his men made an all-night march, and dawn found them in Hebron.


  Chapter 3.

    1: There followed a long war between the house of Saul and the house of David, in which David grew ever stronger, but the house of Saul ever weaker.
Sons Born in Hebron. 
    2: 
    3: 1 There followed a long war between the house of Saul and the house of David, in which David grew ever stronger, but the house of Saul ever weaker.
Sons Born in Hebron. 2 Sons were born to David in Hebron: his firstborn, Amnon, of Ahinoam from Jezreel; 3 the second, Chileab, of Abigail the wife of Nabal of Carmel; the third, Absalom, son of Maacah, who was the daughter of Talmai, king of Geshur; 
    4: the fourth, Adonijah, son of Haggith; the fifth, Shephatiah, son of Abital; 
    5: and the sixth, Ithream, by David’s wife Eglah. These were born to David in Hebron.
Ishbaal and Abner Quarrel. 
    6: During the war between the house of Saul and the house of David, Abner was gaining power in the house of Saul. 
    7: Now Saul had had a concubine, Rizpah, the daughter of Aiah. And Ishbaal, son of Saul, said to Abner, “Why have you slept with my father’s concubine?” 
    8: Enraged at the words of Ishbaal, Abner said, “Am I a dog’s head from Judah? As of today, I have been loyal to the house of Saul your father, to his brothers and his friends, and I have kept you out of David’s clutches; and today you charge me with a crime involving a woman! 
    9: ay God do thus to Abner, and more, if I do not carry out for David what the Lord swore to him— 
    10: that is, take away the kingdom from the house of Saul and establish the throne of David over Israel as well as Judah, from Dan to Beer-sheba.” 
    11: Ishbaal was no longer able to say a word to Abner, he feared him so.
Abner and David Reconciled. 
    12: Then Abner sent messengers to David in Telam, where he was at the moment, to say, “Make a covenant with me, and you have me on your side, to bring all Israel over to you.” 
    13: He replied, “Good, I will make a covenant with you. But one thing I require of you. You must not appear before me unless you bring back Michal, Saul’s daughter, when you come to present yourself to me.” 
    14: At the same time David sent messengers to Ishbaal, son of Saul, to say, “Give me my wife Michal, whom I betrothed by paying a hundred Philistine foreskins.” 
    15: Ishbaal sent for her and took her away from her husband Paltiel, son of Laish, 
    16: who followed her weeping as far as Bahurim. But Abner said to him, “Go back!” So he turned back.

    17: Abner then had a word with the elders of Israel: “For some time you have been wanting David as your king. 
    18: Now take action, for the Lord has said of David: By David my servant I will save my people Israel from the power of the Philistines and from the power of all their enemies.” 
    19: Abner also spoke with Benjamin, and then went to speak with David in Hebron concerning all that would be agreeable to Israel and to the whole house of Benjamin. 
    20: When Abner, accompanied by twenty men, came to David in Hebron, David prepared a feast for Abner and for the men who were with him. 
    21: Then Abner said to David, “I will now go to assemble all Israel for my lord the king, that they may make a covenant with you; you will then be king over all whom you wish to rule.” So David let Abner go on his way in peace.
Death of Abner. 
    22: Just then David’s servants and Joab were coming in from an expedition, bringing much plunder with them. Abner, having been dismissed by David, was no longer with him in Hebron but had gone on his way in peace. 
    23: When Joab and the whole force he had with him arrived, he was informed, “Abner, son of Ner, came to David, and he let him go on his way in peace.” 
    24: So Joab went to the king and said: “What have you done? Abner came to you! Why did you let him get away? 
    25: Don’t you know Abner? He came to trick you, to learn your comings and goings, to learn everything you do.” 
    26: Joab then left David and sent messengers after Abner to bring him back from the cistern of Sirah; but David did not know. 
    27: When Abner returned to Hebron, Joab took him aside within the city gate to speak with him privately. There he stabbed him in the abdomen, and he died for the blood of Asahel, Joab’s brother. 
    28: Later David heard of it and said: “Before the Lord, I and my kingdom are forever innocent. 
    29: May the blood of Abner, son of Ner, be on the head of Joab and all his family. May Joab’s family never be without one suffering from a discharge, or one with a skin disease, or a man who holds the distaff, or one falling by the sword, or one in need of food!” 
    30: Joab and Abishai his brother had been lying in wait for Abner because he killed Asahel their brother in battle at Gibeon.
David Mourns Abner. 
    31: Then David said to Joab and to all the people who were with him, “Tear your garments, put on sackcloth, and mourn over Abner.” King David himself followed the bier. 
    32: When they had buried Abner in Hebron, the king wept aloud at the grave of Abner, and all the people wept. 
    33: And the king sang this lament over Abner:
    Should Abner have died like a fool?

    34: 
Your hands were not bound with chains,
    nor your feet placed in fetters;
As one falls before the wicked, you fell.
And all the people continued to weep for him. 
    35: Then they went to console David with food while it was still day. But David swore, “May God do thus to me, and more, if before the sun goes down I eat bread or anything else.” 
    36: All the people noted this with approval, just as everything the king did met with their approval. 
    37: So on that day all the people and all Israel came to know that it was not the king’s doing that Abner, son of Ner, was put to death. 
    38: The king then said to his servants: “Do you not know that a prince, a great man, has fallen today in Israel. 
    39: Although I am the anointed king, I am weak this day, and these men, the sons of Zeruiah, are too ruthless for me. May the Lord repay the evildoer in accordance with his evil deed.”


  Chapter 4.

    1: When Ishbaal, son of Saul, heard that Abner was dead in Hebron, he lost his resolve and all Israel was alarmed. 
    2: Ishbaal, son of Saul, had two company leaders named Baanah and Rechab, sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, of the tribe of Benjamin—Beeroth, too, was ascribed to Benjamin: 
    3: 
    4: Death of Ishbaal. 1 When Ishbaal, son of Saul, heard that Abner was dead in Hebron, he lost his resolve and all Israel was alarmed. 2 Ishbaal, son of Saul, had two company leaders named Baanah and Rechab, sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, of the tribe of Benjamin—Beeroth, too, was ascribed to Benjamin: 3 the Beerothites fled to Gittaim, where they have been resident aliens to this day. 4 (Jonathan, son of Saul, had a son with crippled feet. He was five years old when the news about Saul and Jonathan came from Jezreel; his nurse took him and fled, but in their hasty flight, he fell and became lame. His name was Meribbaal.) 
    5: The sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, Rechab and Baanah, came into the house of Ishbaal during the heat of the day, while he was lying on his bed in the afternoon. 
    6: The gatekeeper of the house had dozed off while sifting wheat, and was asleep. So Rechab and his brother Baanah slipped past her 
    7: and entered the house while Ishbaal was lying asleep in his bedroom. They struck and killed him, and cut off his head. Then, taking the head, they traveled on the Arabah road all night long.
The Murder Avenged. 
    8: They brought the head of Ishbaal to David in Hebron and said to the king: “This is the head of Ishbaal, son of your enemy Saul, who sought your life. Thus has the Lord this day avenged my lord the king on Saul and his posterity.” 
    9: ut David replied to Rechab and his brother Baanah, sons of Rimmon the Beerothite: “As the Lord lives, who rescued me from every distress: 
    10: the man who reported to me, ‘Saul is dead,’ and thought he was bringing good news, that man I seized and killed in Ziglag: that was the reward I gave him. 
    11: How much more now, when wicked men have slain an innocent man in bed at home, must I require his blood from you and purge you from the land!” 
    12: So at David’s command, the young men killed them and cut off their hands and feet, hanging them up near the pool in Hebron. But he took the head of Ishbaal and buried it in Abner’s grave in Hebron.


End of day 70.