Day 28:

Reading Leviticus, chapters ['17', '18', '19', '20']:

  Chapter 17.

    1: 
Sacredness of Blood. 1 The Lord said to Moses: 
    2: Speak to Aaron and his sons, as well as to all the Israelites, and tell them: This is what the Lord has commanded: 
    3: Any Israelite who slaughters an ox or a sheep or a goat, whether in the camp or outside of it, 
    4: without first bringing it to the entrance of the tent of meeting to present it as an offering to the Lord in front of the Lord’s tabernacle, shall be judged guilty of bloodshed—that individual has shed blood, and shall be cut off from the people. 
    5: This is so that such sacrifices as they used to offer in the open field the Israelites shall henceforth bring to the Lord at the entrance of the tent of meeting, to the priest, and sacrifice them there as communion sacrifices to the Lord. 
    6: 
    7: Sacredness of Blood. 1 The Lord said to Moses: 2 Speak to Aaron and his sons, as well as to all the Israelites, and tell them: This is what the Lord has commanded: 3 Any Israelite who slaughters an ox or a sheep or a goat, whether in the camp or outside of it, 4 without first bringing it to the entrance of the tent of meeting to present it as an offering to the Lord in front of the Lord’s tabernacle, shall be judged guilty of bloodshed[b]—that individual has shed blood, and shall be cut off from the people. 5 This is so that such sacrifices as they used to offer in the open field the Israelites shall henceforth bring to the Lord at the entrance of the tent of meeting, to the priest, and sacrifice them there as communion sacrifices to the Lord. 6 The priest will splash the blood on the altar of the Lord at the entrance of the tent of meeting and burn the fat for an odor pleasing to the Lord. 7 No longer shall they offer their sacrifices to the demons[c] with whom they prostituted themselves. This shall be an everlasting statute for them and their descendants.

    8: Tell them, therefore: Anyone, whether of the house of Israel or of the aliens residing among them, who offers a burnt offering or sacrifice 
    9: ithout bringing it to the entrance of the tent of meeting to offer it to the Lord, shall be cut off from the people. 
    10: As for anyone, whether of the house of Israel or of the aliens residing among them, who consumes any blood, I will set myself against that individual and will cut that person off from among the people, 
    11: since the life of the flesh is in the blood, and I have given it to you to make atonement on the altar for yourselves, because it is the blood as life that makes atonement. 
    12: That is why I have told the Israelites: No one among you, not even a resident alien, may consume blood.

    13: Anyone hunting, whether of the Israelites or of the aliens residing among them, who catches an animal or a bird that may be eaten, shall pour out its blood and cover it with earth, 
    14: since the life of all flesh is its blood. I have told the Israelites: You shall not consume the blood of any flesh. Since the life of all flesh is its blood, anyone who consumes it shall be cut off.

    15: Everyone, whether a native or an alien, who eats of an animal that died of itself or was killed by a wild beast, shall wash his garments, bathe in water, and be unclean until evening, and then become clean. 
    16: 
    17: Sacredness of Blood. 1 The Lord said to Moses: 2 Speak to Aaron and his sons, as well as to all the Israelites, and tell them: This is what the Lord has commanded: 3 Any Israelite who slaughters an ox or a sheep or a goat, whether in the camp or outside of it, 4 without first bringing it to the entrance of the tent of meeting to present it as an offering to the Lord in front of the Lord’s tabernacle, shall be judged guilty of bloodshed[b]—that individual has shed blood, and shall be cut off from the people. 5 This is so that such sacrifices as they used to offer in the open field the Israelites shall henceforth bring to the Lord at the entrance of the tent of meeting, to the priest, and sacrifice them there as communion sacrifices to the Lord. 6 The priest will splash the blood on the altar of the Lord at the entrance of the tent of meeting and burn the fat for an odor pleasing to the Lord. 7 No longer shall they offer their sacrifices to the demons[c] with whom they prostituted themselves. This shall be an everlasting statute for them and their descendants.
8 Tell them, therefore: Anyone, whether of the house of Israel or of the aliens residing among them, who offers a burnt offering or sacrifice 9 without bringing it to the entrance of the tent of meeting to offer it to the Lord, shall be cut off from the people. 10 As for anyone, whether of the house of Israel or of the aliens residing among them, who consumes any blood, I will set myself against that individual and will cut that person off from among the people, 11 since the life of the flesh is in the blood, and I have given it to you to make atonement[d] on the altar for yourselves, because it is the blood as life that makes atonement. 12 That is why I have told the Israelites: No one among you, not even a resident alien, may consume blood.
13 Anyone hunting,[e] whether of the Israelites or of the aliens residing among them, who catches an animal or a bird that may be eaten, shall pour out its blood and cover it with earth, 14 since the life of all flesh is its blood. I have told the Israelites: You shall not consume the blood of any flesh. Since the life of all flesh is its blood, anyone who consumes it shall be cut off.
15 Everyone, whether a native or an alien, who eats of an animal that died of itself or was killed by a wild beast, shall wash his garments, bathe in water, and be unclean until evening, and then become clean. 16 If one does not wash his garments and bathe, that person shall bear the penalty.


  Chapter 18.

    1: 
Laws Concerning Sexual Behavior. 1 The Lord said to Moses: 
    2: Speak to the Israelites and tell them: I, the Lord, am your God. 
    3: You shall not do as they do in the land of Egypt, where you once lived, nor shall you do as they do in the land of Canaan, where I am bringing you; do not conform to their customs. 
    4: My decrees you shall carry out, and my statutes you shall take care to follow. I, the Lord, am your God. 
    5: Keep, then, my statutes and decrees, for the person who carries them out will find life through them. I am the Lord.

    6: None of you shall approach a close relative[d] to have sexual intercourse. I am the Lord. 
    7: 
    8: Laws Concerning Sexual Behavior. 1 The Lord said to Moses: 2 Speak to the Israelites and tell them: I, the Lord, am your God. 3 You shall not do as they do in the land of Egypt, where you once lived, nor shall you do as they do in the land of Canaan, where I am bringing you; do not conform to their customs. 4 My decrees you shall carry out, and my statutes you shall take care to follow. I, the Lord, am your God. 5 Keep, then, my statutes and decrees, for the person who carries them out will find life[b] through them. I am the Lord.
6 [c]None of you shall approach a close relative[d] to have sexual intercourse. I am the Lord. 7 [e]You shall not disgrace your father by having intercourse with your mother. She is your own mother; you shall not have intercourse with her. 8 You shall not have intercourse with your father’s wife, for that would be a disgrace to your father. 
    9: ou shall not have intercourse with your sister, your father’s daughter or your mother’s daughter, whether she was born in your own household or born elsewhere. 
    10: You shall not have intercourse with your son’s daughter or with your daughter’s daughter, for that would be a disgrace to you. 
    11: You shall not have intercourse with the daughter whom your father’s wife bore to him in his household, since she, too, is your sister. 
    12: You shall not have intercourse with your father’s sister, since she is your father’s relative. 
    13: You shall not have intercourse with your mother’s sister, since she is your mother’s relative. 
    14: You shall not disgrace your father’s brother by having sexual relations with his wife, since she, too, is your aunt. 
    15: You shall not have intercourse with your daughter-in-law; she is your son’s wife; you shall not have intercourse with her. 
    16: You shall not have intercourse with your brother’s wife; that would be a disgrace to your brother. 
    17: 
    18: Laws Concerning Sexual Behavior. 1 The Lord said to Moses: 2 Speak to the Israelites and tell them: I, the Lord, am your God. 3 You shall not do as they do in the land of Egypt, where you once lived, nor shall you do as they do in the land of Canaan, where I am bringing you; do not conform to their customs. 4 My decrees you shall carry out, and my statutes you shall take care to follow. I, the Lord, am your God. 5 Keep, then, my statutes and decrees, for the person who carries them out will find life[b] through them. I am the Lord.
6 [c]None of you shall approach a close relative[d] to have sexual intercourse. I am the Lord. 7 [e]You shall not disgrace your father by having intercourse with your mother. She is your own mother; you shall not have intercourse with her. 8 You shall not have intercourse with your father’s wife, for that would be a disgrace to your father. 9 You shall not have intercourse with your sister,[f] your father’s daughter or your mother’s daughter, whether she was born in your own household or born elsewhere. 10 You shall not have intercourse with your son’s daughter or with your daughter’s daughter,[g] for that would be a disgrace to you. 11 You shall not have intercourse with the daughter whom your father’s wife bore to him in his household, since she, too, is your sister. 12 You shall not have intercourse with your father’s sister, since she is your father’s relative. 13 You shall not have intercourse with your mother’s sister, since she is your mother’s relative. 14 You shall not disgrace your father’s brother by having sexual relations with his wife, since she, too, is your aunt. 15 You shall not have intercourse with your daughter-in-law;[h] she is your son’s wife; you shall not have intercourse with her. 16 You shall not have intercourse with your brother’s wife;[i] that would be a disgrace to your brother. 17 You shall not have intercourse with a woman and also with her daughter, nor shall you marry and have intercourse with her son’s daughter or her daughter’s daughter; they are related to her. This would be shameful. 18 While your wife is still living you shall not marry her sister as her rival and have intercourse with her.

    19: You shall not approach a woman to have intercourse with her while she is in her menstrual uncleanness. 
    20: You shall not have sexual relations with your neighbor’s wife, defiling yourself with her. 
    21: You shall not offer any of your offspring for immolation to Molech, thus profaning the name of your God. I am the Lord. 
    22: You shall not lie with a male as with a woman; such a thing is an abomination. 
    23: You shall not have sexual relations with an animal, defiling yourself with it; nor shall a woman set herself in front of an animal to mate with it; that is perverse.

    24: Do not defile yourselves by any of these things, because by them the nations whom I am driving out of your way have defiled themselves. 
    25: And so the land has become defiled, and I have punished it for its wickedness, and the land has vomited out its inhabitants. 
    26: You, however, must keep my statutes and decrees, avoiding all these abominations, both the natives and the aliens resident among you— 
    27: because the previous inhabitants did all these abominations and the land became defiled; 
    28: otherwise the land will vomit you out also for having defiled it, just as it vomited out the nations before you. 
    29: For whoever does any of these abominations shall be cut off from the people. 
    30: Heed my charge, then, not to observe the abominable customs that have been observed before your time, and thus become impure by them. I, the Lord, am your God.


  Chapter 19.

    1: 
Various Rules of Conduct. 1 The Lord said to Moses: 
    2: Speak to the whole Israelite community and tell them: Be holy, for I, the Lord your God, am holy. 
    3: Each of you revere your mother and father, and keep my sabbaths. I, the Lord, am your God.

    4: Do not turn aside to idols, nor make molten gods for yourselves. I, the Lord, am your God.

    5: When you sacrifice your communion sacrifice to the Lord, you shall sacrifice it so that it is acceptable on your behalf. 
    6: It must be eaten on the day of your sacrifice or on the following day. Whatever is left over until the third day shall be burned in fire. 
    7: If any of it is eaten on the third day, it will be a desecrated offering and not be accepted; 
    8: 
    9: arious Rules of Conduct. 1 The Lord said to Moses: 2 Speak to the whole Israelite community and tell them: Be holy, for I, the Lord your God, am holy. 3 [b]Each of you revere your mother and father, and keep my sabbaths. I, the Lord, am your God.
4 Do not turn aside to idols, nor make molten gods for yourselves. I, the Lord, am your God.
5 When you sacrifice your communion sacrifice to the Lord, you shall sacrifice it so that it is acceptable on your behalf. 6 It must be eaten on the day of your sacrifice or on the following day. Whatever is left over until the third day shall be burned in fire. 7 If any of it is eaten on the third day, it will be a desecrated offering and not be accepted; 8 whoever eats of it then shall bear the penalty for having profaned what is sacred to the Lord. Such a one shall be cut off from the people.
9 [c]When you reap the harvest of your land, you shall not be so thorough that you reap the field to its very edge, nor shall you gather the gleanings of your harvest. 
    10: Likewise, you shall not pick your vineyard bare, nor gather up the grapes that have fallen. These things you shall leave for the poor and the alien. I, the Lord, am your God.

    11: You shall not steal. You shall not deceive or speak falsely to one another. 
    12: You shall not swear falsely by my name, thus profaning the name of your God. I am the Lord.

    13: You shall not exploit your neighbor. You shall not commit robbery. You shall not withhold overnight the wages of your laborer. 
    14: You shall not insult the deaf, or put a stumbling block in front of the blind, but you shall fear your God. I am the Lord.

    15: You shall not act dishonestly in rendering judgment. Show neither partiality to the weak nor deference to the mighty, but judge your neighbor justly. 
    16: You shall not go about spreading slander among your people; nor shall you stand by idly when your neighbor’s life is at stake. I am the Lord.

    17: You shall not hate any of your kindred in your heart. Reprove your neighbor openly so that you do not incur sin because of that person. 
    18: 
    19: Various Rules of Conduct. 1 The Lord said to Moses: 2 Speak to the whole Israelite community and tell them: Be holy, for I, the Lord your God, am holy. 3 [b]Each of you revere your mother and father, and keep my sabbaths. I, the Lord, am your God.
4 Do not turn aside to idols, nor make molten gods for yourselves. I, the Lord, am your God.
5 When you sacrifice your communion sacrifice to the Lord, you shall sacrifice it so that it is acceptable on your behalf. 6 It must be eaten on the day of your sacrifice or on the following day. Whatever is left over until the third day shall be burned in fire. 7 If any of it is eaten on the third day, it will be a desecrated offering and not be accepted; 8 whoever eats of it then shall bear the penalty for having profaned what is sacred to the Lord. Such a one shall be cut off from the people.
9 [c]When you reap the harvest of your land, you shall not be so thorough that you reap the field to its very edge, nor shall you gather the gleanings of your harvest. 10 Likewise, you shall not pick your vineyard bare, nor gather up the grapes that have fallen. These things you shall leave for the poor and the alien. I, the Lord, am your God.
11 [d]You shall not steal. You shall not deceive or speak falsely to one another. 12 You shall not swear falsely by my name, thus profaning the name of your God. I am the Lord.
13 You shall not exploit your neighbor. You shall not commit robbery. You shall not withhold overnight the wages of your laborer. 14 [e]You shall not insult the deaf, or put a stumbling block in front of the blind, but you shall fear your God. I am the Lord.
15 You shall not act dishonestly in rendering judgment. Show neither partiality to the weak nor deference to the mighty, but judge your neighbor justly. 16 You shall not go about spreading slander among your people; nor shall you stand by idly when your neighbor’s life is at stake. I am the Lord.
17 [f]You shall not hate any of your kindred in your heart. Reprove your neighbor openly so that you do not incur sin because of that person. 18 Take no revenge and cherish no grudge against your own people. You shall love your neighbor as yourself. I am the Lord.
19 [g]Keep my statutes: do not breed any of your domestic animals with others of a different species; do not sow a field of yours with two different kinds of seed; and do not put on a garment woven with two different kinds of thread.

    20: If a man has sexual relations with a female slave who has been acquired by another man but has not yet been redeemed or given her freedom, an investigation shall be made. They shall not be put to death, because she has not been freed. 
    21: The man shall bring to the entrance of the tent of meeting as his reparation to the Lord a ram as a reparation offering. 
    22: With the ram of the reparation offering the priest shall make atonement before the Lord for the wrong the man has committed, so that he will be forgiven for the wrong he has committed.

    23: When you come into the land and plant any fruit tree there, first look upon its fruit as if it were uncircumcised. For three years, it shall be uncircumcised for you; it may not be eaten. 
    24: In the fourth year, however, all of its fruit shall be dedicated to the Lord in joyous celebration. 
    25: Not until the fifth year may you eat its fruit, to increase the yield for you. I, the Lord, am your God.

    26: Do not eat anything with the blood still in it. Do not recite charms or practice soothsaying. 
    27: Do not clip your hair at the temples, nor spoil the edges of your beard. 
    28: Do not lacerate your bodies for the dead, and do not tattoo yourselves. I am the Lord.

    29: You shall not degrade your daughter by making a prostitute of her; otherwise the land will prostitute itself and become full of lewdness. 
    30: Keep my sabbaths, and reverence my sanctuary. I am the Lord.

    31: Do not turn to ghosts or consult spirits, by which you will be defiled. I, the Lord, am your God.

    32: Stand up in the presence of the aged, show respect for the old, and fear your God. I am the Lord.

    33: When an alien resides with you in your land, do not mistreat such a one. 
    34: You shall treat the alien who resides with you no differently than the natives born among you; you shall love the alien as yourself; for you too were once aliens in the land of Egypt. I, the Lord, am your God.

    35: Do not act dishonestly in using measures of length or weight or capacity. 
    36: You shall have a true scale and true weights, an honest ephah and an honest hin. I, the Lord, am your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt. 
    37: Be careful, then, to observe all my statutes and decrees. I am the Lord.


  Chapter 20.

    1: 
    2: 
Penalties for Various Sins. 1 The Lord said to Moses: 2 Tell the Israelites: Anyone, whether an Israelite or an alien residing in Israel, who gives offspring to Molech shall be put to death. The people of the land shall stone that person. 
    3: I myself will turn against and cut off that individual from among the people; for in the giving of offspring to Molech, my sanctuary was defiled and my holy name was profaned. 
    4: If the people of the land condone the giving of offspring to Molech, by failing to put the wrongdoer to death, 
    5: I myself will turn against that individual and his or her family, and I will cut off from their people both the wrongdoer and all who follow this person by prostituting themselves with Molech.

    6: Should anyone turn to ghosts and spirits and prostitute oneself with them, I will turn against that person and cut such a one off from among the people. 
    7: Sanctify yourselves, then, and be holy; for I, the Lord, your God, am holy. 
    8: Be careful, therefore, to observe my statutes. I, the Lord, make you holy.

    9: nyone who curses father or mother shall be put to death; and having cursed father or mother, such a one will bear the bloodguilt.[c] 
    10: If a man commits adultery with his neighbor’s wife, both the adulterer and the adulteress shall be put to death. 
    11: If a man disgraces his father by lying with his father’s wife, the two of them shall be put to death; their bloodguilt is upon them. 
    12: If a man lies with his daughter-in-law, both of them shall be put to death; they have done what is perverse; their bloodguilt is upon them. 
    13: If a man lies with a male as with a woman, they have committed an abomination; the two of them shall be put to death; their bloodguilt is upon them. 
    14: If a man marries a woman and her mother also, that is shameful conduct; the man and the two women as well shall be burned to death, so that shamefulness may not be found among you. 
    15: If a man has sexual relations with an animal, the man shall be put to death, and you shall kill the animal. 
    16: If a woman goes up to any animal to mate with it, you shall kill the woman and the animal; they shall both be put to death; their bloodguilt is upon them. 
    17: If a man marries his sister, his father’s daughter or his mother’s daughter, and they have intercourse with each other, that is disgraceful; they shall be publicly cut off from the people; the man shall bear the penalty of having had intercourse with his own sister. 
    18: If a man lies with a woman during her menstrual period and has intercourse with her, he has laid bare the source of her flow and she has uncovered it. The two of them shall be cut off from the people. 
    19: 
    20: Penalties for Various Sins. 1 The Lord said to Moses: 2 Tell the Israelites: Anyone, whether an Israelite or an alien residing in Israel, who gives offspring to Molech shall be put to death. The people of the land shall stone that person. 3 I myself will turn against and cut off that individual from among the people; for in the giving of offspring to Molech, my sanctuary was defiled and my holy name was profaned. 4 If the people of the land condone the giving of offspring to Molech, by failing to put the wrongdoer to death, 5 I myself will turn against that individual and his or her family, and I will cut off from their people both the wrongdoer and all who follow this person by prostituting themselves with Molech.
6 Should anyone turn to ghosts and spirits and prostitute oneself with them, I will turn against that person and cut such a one off from among the people. 7 Sanctify yourselves, then, and be holy; for I, the Lord, your God, am holy. 8 Be careful, therefore, to observe my statutes. I, the Lord, make you holy.
9 Anyone who curses father or mother shall be put to death;[b] and having cursed father or mother, such a one will bear the bloodguilt.[c] 10 [d]If a man commits adultery with his neighbor’s wife, both the adulterer and the adulteress shall be put to death. 11 If a man disgraces his father by lying with his father’s wife, the two of them shall be put to death; their bloodguilt is upon them. 12 If a man lies with his daughter-in-law, both of them shall be put to death; they have done what is perverse; their bloodguilt is upon them. 13 If a man lies with a male as with a woman, they have committed an abomination; the two of them shall be put to death; their bloodguilt is upon them. 14 If a man marries a woman and her mother also, that is shameful conduct; the man and the two women as well shall be burned to death, so that shamefulness may not be found among you. 15 If a man has sexual relations with an animal, the man shall be put to death, and you shall kill the animal. 16 If a woman goes up to any animal to mate with it, you shall kill the woman and the animal; they shall both be put to death; their bloodguilt is upon them. 17 If a man marries his sister, his father’s daughter or his mother’s daughter, and they have intercourse with each other, that is disgraceful; they shall be publicly cut off[e] from the people; the man shall bear the penalty of having had intercourse with his own sister. 18 If a man lies with a woman during her menstrual period and has intercourse with her, he has laid bare the source of her flow and she has uncovered it. The two of them shall be cut off from the people. 19 You shall not have intercourse with your mother’s sister or your father’s sister, because that dishonors one’s own flesh; they shall bear their penalty. 20 If a man lies with his uncle’s wife, he disgraces his uncle; they shall bear the penalty; they shall die childless. 
    21: If a man takes his brother’s wife, it is severe defilement and he has disgraced his brother; they shall be childless.

    22: Be careful to observe all my statutes and all my decrees; otherwise the land where I am bringing you to dwell will vomit you out. 
    23: Do not conform, therefore, to the customs of the nations whom I am driving out of your way, because all these things that they have done have filled me with disgust for them. 
    24: But to you I have said: You shall take possession of their land. I am giving it to you to possess, a land flowing with milk and honey. I, the Lord, am your God, who have set you apart from other peoples. 
    25: You, too, must set apart, then, the clean animals from the unclean, and the clean birds from the unclean, so that you do not make yourselves detestable through any beast or bird or any creature which creeps on the ground that I have set apart for you as unclean. 
    26: To me, therefore, you shall be holy; for I, the Lord, am holy, and I have set you apart from other peoples to be my own.

    27: A man or a woman who acts as a medium or clairvoyant shall be put to death. They shall be stoned to death; their bloodguilt is upon them.


End of day 28.