Day 323:

Reading 2-Corinthians, chapters ['9', '10', '11', '12']:

  Chapter 9.

    1: Now about the service to the holy ones, it is superfluous for me to write to you, 
    2: for I know your eagerness, about which I boast of you to the Macedonians, that Achaia has been ready since last year; and your zeal has stirred up most of them. 
    3: Nonetheless, I sent the brothers so that our boast about you might not prove empty in this case, so that you might be ready, as I said, 
    4: for fear that if any Macedonians come with me and find you not ready we might be put to shame (to say nothing of you) in this conviction. 
    5: So I thought it necessary to encourage the brothers to go on ahead to you and arrange in advance for your promised gift, so that in this way it might be ready as a bountiful gift and not as an exaction.

    6: Consider this: whoever sows sparingly will also reap sparingly, and whoever sows bountifully will also reap bountifully. 
    7: Each must do as already determined, without sadness or compulsion, for God loves a cheerful giver. 
    8: 
    9: od’s Indescribable Gift. 1 Now about the service to the holy ones, it is superfluous for me to write to you, 2 for I know your eagerness, about which I boast of you to the Macedonians, that Achaia[b] has been ready since last year; and your zeal has stirred up most of them. 3 Nonetheless, I sent the brothers[c] so that our boast about you might not prove empty in this case, so that you might be ready, as I said, 4 for fear that if any Macedonians come with me and find you not ready we might be put to shame (to say nothing of you) in this conviction. 5 So I thought it necessary to encourage the brothers to go on ahead to you and arrange in advance for your promised gift, so that in this way it might be ready as a bountiful gift and not as an exaction.
6 Consider this: whoever sows sparingly will also reap sparingly, and whoever sows bountifully will also reap bountifully. 7 Each must do as already determined, without sadness or compulsion, for God loves a cheerful giver. 8 [d]Moreover, God is able to make every grace abundant for you, so that in all things, always having all you need, you may have an abundance for every good work. 9 As it is written:
“He scatters abroad, he gives to the poor;
    his righteousness endures forever.”

    10: The one who supplies seed to the sower and bread for food will supply and multiply your seed and increase the harvest of your righteousness.

    11: You are being enriched in every way for all generosity, which through us produces thanksgiving to God, 
    12: for the administration of this public service is not only supplying the needs of the holy ones but is also overflowing in many acts of thanksgiving to God. 
    13: Through the evidence of this service, you are glorifying God for your obedient confession of the gospel of Christ and the generosity of your contribution to them and to all others, 
    14: while in prayer on your behalf they long for you, because of the surpassing grace of God upon you. 
    15: Thanks be to God for his indescribable gift!


  Chapter 10.

    1: 
Accusation of Weakness. 1 Now I myself, Paul, urge you through the gentleness and clemency of Christ,[c] I who am humble when face to face with you, but brave toward you when absent, 
    2: I beg you that, when present, I may not have to be brave with that confidence with which I intend to act boldly against some who consider us as acting according to the flesh. 
    3: For, although we are in the flesh, we do not battle according to the flesh, 
    4: for the weapons of our battle are not of flesh but are enormously powerful, capable of destroying fortresses. We destroy arguments 
    5: and every pretension raising itself against the knowledge of God, and take every thought captive in obedience to Christ, 
    6: and we are ready to punish every disobedience, once your obedience is complete.

    7: Look at what confronts you. Whoever is confident of belonging to Christ should consider that as he belongs to Christ, so do we. 
    8: And even if I should boast a little too much of our authority, which the Lord gave for building you up and not for tearing you down, I shall not be put to shame. 
    9: 
    10: Accusation of Weakness. 1 Now I myself, Paul, urge you through the gentleness and clemency of Christ,[c] I who am humble when face to face with you, but brave toward you when absent, 2 [d]I beg you that, when present, I may not have to be brave with that confidence with which I intend to act boldly against some who consider us as acting according to the flesh. 3 For, although we are in the flesh, we do not battle according to the flesh,[e] 4 for the weapons of our battle are not of flesh but are enormously powerful, capable of destroying fortresses. We destroy arguments 5 and every pretension raising itself against the knowledge of God, and take every thought captive in obedience to Christ, 6 and we are ready to punish every disobedience, once your obedience is complete.
7 Look at what confronts you. Whoever is confident of belonging to Christ should consider that as he belongs to Christ, so do we.[f] 8 And even if I should boast a little too much of our authority, which the Lord gave for building you up and not for tearing you down, I shall not be put to shame. 9 [g]May I not seem as one frightening you through letters. 10 For someone will say, “His letters are severe and forceful, but his bodily presence is weak, and his speech contemptible.” 
    11: Such a person must understand that what we are in word through letters when absent, that we also are in action when present.

    12: Not that we dare to class or compare ourselves with some of those who recommend themselves. But when they measure themselves by one another and compare themselves with one another, they are without understanding. 
    13: But we will not boast beyond measure but will keep to the limits God has apportioned us, namely, to reach even to you. 
    14: For we are not overreaching ourselves, as though we did not reach you; we indeed first came to you with the gospel of Christ. 
    15: We are not boasting beyond measure, in other people’s labors; yet our hope is that, as your faith increases, our influence among you may be greatly enlarged, within our proper limits, 
    16: so that we may preach the gospel even beyond you, not boasting of work already done in another’s sphere. 
    17: “Whoever boasts, should boast in the Lord.” 
    18: For it is not the one who recommends himself who is approved, but the one whom the Lord recommends.


  Chapter 11.

    1: 
Preaching Without Charge. 1 If only you would put up with a little foolishness from me![b] Please put up with me. 
    2: For I am jealous of you with the jealousy of God, since I betrothed you to one husband to present you as a chaste virgin to Christ. 
    3: But I am afraid that, as the serpent deceived Eve by his cunning, your thoughts may be corrupted from a sincere [and pure] commitment to Christ. 
    4: For if someone comes and preaches another Jesus than the one we preached, or if you receive a different spirit from the one you received or a different gospel from the one you accepted, you put up with it well enough. 
    5: For I think that I am not in any way inferior to these “superapostles.” 
    6: Even if I am untrained in speaking, I am not so in knowledge; in every way we have made this plain to you in all things.

    7: Did I make a mistake when I humbled myself so that you might be exalted, because I preached the gospel of God to you without charge? 
    8: I plundered other churches by accepting from them in order to minister to you. 
    9: nd when I was with you and in need, I did not burden anyone, for the brothers who came from Macedonia supplied my needs. So I refrained and will refrain from burdening you in any way. 
    10: 
    11: Preaching Without Charge. 1 If only you would put up with a little foolishness from me![b] Please put up with me. 2 [c]For I am jealous of you with the jealousy of God, since I betrothed you to one husband to present you as a chaste virgin to Christ. 3 But I am afraid that, as the serpent deceived Eve[d] by his cunning, your thoughts may be corrupted from a sincere [and pure] commitment to Christ. 4 For if someone comes and preaches another Jesus[e] than the one we preached, or if you receive a different spirit from the one you received or a different gospel from the one you accepted, you put up with it well enough. 5 [f]For I think that I am not in any way inferior to these “superapostles.” 6 Even if I am untrained in speaking, I am not so in knowledge; in every way we have made this plain to you in all things.[g]
7 [h]Did I make a mistake when I humbled myself so that you might be exalted, because I preached the gospel of God to you without charge? 8 I plundered other churches by accepting from them in order to minister to you. 9 And when I was with you and in need, I did not burden anyone, for the brothers who came from Macedonia supplied my needs. So I refrained and will refrain from burdening you in any way. 10 By the truth of Christ in me, this boast of mine shall not be silenced in the regions of Achaia. 11 [i]And why? Because I do not love you? God knows I do!

    12: And what I do I will continue to do, in order to end this pretext of those who seek a pretext for being regarded as we are in the mission of which they boast. 
    13: For such people are false apostles, deceitful workers, who masquerade as apostles of Christ. 
    14: And no wonder, for even Satan masquerades as an angel of light. 
    15: So it is not strange that his ministers also masquerade as ministers of righteousness. Their end will correspond to their deeds.
Paul’s Boast: His Labors. 
    16: I repeat, no one should consider me foolish;[l] but if you do, accept me as a fool, so that I too may boast a little.[m] 
    17: What I am saying I am not saying according to the Lord but as in foolishness, in this boastful state. 
    18: Since many boast according to the flesh, I too will boast. 
    19: For you gladly put up with fools, since you are wise yourselves. 
    20: For you put up with it if someone enslaves you, or devours you, or gets the better of you, or puts on airs, or slaps you in the face. 
    21: To my shame I say that we were too weak!
But what anyone dares to boast of (I am speaking in foolishness) I also dare. 
    22: Are they Hebrews? So am I. Are they Israelites? So am I. Are they descendants of Abraham? So am I. 
    23: Are they ministers of Christ? (I am talking like an insane person.) I am still more,[r] with far greater labors, far more imprisonments, far worse beatings, and numerous brushes with death. 
    24: Five times at the hands of the Jews I received forty lashes minus one. 
    25: Three times I was beaten with rods, once I was stoned, three times I was shipwrecked, I passed a night and a day on the deep; 
    26: on frequent journeys, in dangers from rivers, dangers from robbers, dangers from my own race, dangers from Gentiles, dangers in the city, dangers in the wilderness, dangers at sea, dangers among false brothers; 
    27: in toil and hardship, through many sleepless nights, through hunger and thirst, through frequent fastings, through cold and exposure. 
    28: And apart from these things, there is the daily pressure upon me of my anxiety for all the churches. 
    29: Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is led to sin, and I am not indignant?
Paul’s Boast: His Weakness. 
    30: If I must boast, I will boast of the things that show my weakness. 
    31: The God and Father of the Lord Jesus knows, he who is blessed forever, that I do not lie. 
    32: At Damascus, the governor under King Aretas guarded the city of Damascus, in order to seize me, 
    33: but I was lowered in a basket through a window in the wall and escaped his hands.


  Chapter 12.

    1: 
    2: 1 I must boast; not that it is profitable, but I will go on to visions and revelations of the Lord. 2 I know someone in Christ who, fourteen years ago (whether in the body or out of the body I do not know, God knows), was caught up to the third heaven. 
    3: And I know that this person (whether in the body or out of the body I do not know, God knows) 
    4: was caught up into Paradise and heard ineffable things, which no one may utter. 
    5: About this person I will boast, but about myself I will not boast, except about my weaknesses. 
    6: Although if I should wish to boast, I would not be foolish, for I would be telling the truth. But I refrain, so that no one may think more of me than what he sees in me or hears from me 
    7: because of the abundance of the revelations. Therefore, that I might not become too elated, a thorn in the flesh was given to me, an angel of Satan, to beat me, to keep me from being too elated. 
    8: Three times I begged the Lord about this, that it might leave me, 
    9: e]but he said to me, “My grace is sufficient for you, for power is made perfect in weakness.” I will rather boast most gladly of my weaknesses,[f] in order that the power of Christ may dwell with me. 
    10: Therefore, I am content with weaknesses, insults, hardships, persecutions, and constraints, for the sake of Christ; for when I am weak, then I am strong.
Selfless Concern for the Church.[h] 
    11: 
    12: 1 I must boast; not that it is profitable, but I will go on to visions and revelations of the Lord. 2 I know someone in Christ who, fourteen years ago (whether in the body or out of the body I do not know, God knows), was caught up to the third heaven. 3 And I know that this person (whether in the body or out of the body I do not know, God knows) 4 was caught up into Paradise and heard ineffable things, which no one may utter. 5 About this person[b] I will boast, but about myself I will not boast, except about my weaknesses. 6 Although if I should wish to boast, I would not be foolish, for I would be telling the truth. But I refrain, so that no one may think more of me than what he sees in me or hears from me 7 because of the abundance of the revelations. Therefore, that I might not become too elated,[c] a thorn in the flesh was given to me, an angel of Satan, to beat me, to keep me from being too elated. 8 Three times[d] I begged the Lord about this, that it might leave me, 9 [e]but he said to me, “My grace is sufficient for you, for power is made perfect in weakness.” I will rather boast most gladly of my weaknesses,[f] in order that the power of Christ may dwell with me. 10 Therefore, I am content with weaknesses, insults, hardships, persecutions, and constraints, for the sake of Christ; for when I am weak, then I am strong.[g]
Selfless Concern for the Church.[h] 11 I have been foolish. You compelled me, for I ought to have been commended by you. For I am in no way inferior to these “superapostles,” even though I am nothing. 12 [i]The signs of an apostle were performed among you with all endurance, signs and wonders, and mighty deeds. 
    13: In what way were you less privileged than the rest of the churches, except that on my part I did not burden you? Forgive me this wrong!

    14: Now I am ready to come to you this third time. And I will not be a burden, for I want not what is yours, but you. Children ought not to save for their parents, but parents for their children. 
    15: I will most gladly spend and be utterly spent for your sakes. If I love you more, am I to be loved less? 
    16: But granted that I myself did not burden you, yet I was crafty and got the better of you by deceit. 
    17: Did I take advantage of you through any of those I sent to you? 
    18: I urged Titus to go and sent the brother with him. Did Titus take advantage of you? Did we not walk in the same spirit? And in the same steps?
Final Warnings and Appeals. 
    19: Have you been thinking all along that we are defending ourselves before you? In the sight of God we are speaking in Christ, and all for building you up, beloved. 
    20: For I fear that when I come I may find you not such as I wish, and that you may find me not as you wish; that there may be rivalry, jealousy, fury, selfishness, slander, gossip, conceit, and disorder. 
    21: I fear that when I come again my God may humiliate me before you, and I may have to mourn over many of those who sinned earlier and have not repented of the impurity, immorality, and licentiousness they practiced.


End of day 323.