Day 356:

Reading Revelation, chapters ['13', '14', '15', '16']:

  Chapter 13.

    1: 
The First Beast. 1 Then I saw a beast come out of the sea with ten horns and seven heads; on its horns were ten diadems, and on its heads blasphemous name[s]. 
    2: 
    3: The First Beast. 1 Then I saw a beast come out of the sea with ten horns and seven heads; on its horns were ten diadems, and on its heads blasphemous name[s]. 2 The beast I saw was like a leopard, but it had feet like a bear’s, and its mouth was like the mouth of a lion.[b] To it the dragon gave its own power and throne, along with great authority. 3 I saw that one of its heads seemed to have been mortally wounded, but this mortal wound was healed.[c] Fascinated, the whole world followed after the beast. 
    4: They worshiped the dragon because it gave its authority to the beast; they also worshiped the beast and said, “Who can compare with the beast or who can fight against it?”

    5: The beast was given a mouth uttering proud boasts and blasphemies, and it was given authority to act for forty-two months.[f] 
    6: It opened its mouth to utter blasphemies against God, blaspheming his name and his dwelling and those who dwell in heaven. 
    7: It was also allowed to wage war against the holy ones and conquer them, and it was granted authority over every tribe, people, tongue, and nation. 
    8: All the inhabitants of the earth will worship it, all whose names were not written from the foundation of the world in the book of life, which belongs to the Lamb who was slain.

    9: Whoever has ears ought to hear these words.

    10: 
Anyone destined for captivity goes into captivity.
Anyone destined to be slain by the sword shall be slain by the sword.
Such is the faithful endurance of the holy ones.
The Second Beast. 
    11: Then I saw another beast come up out of the earth; it had two horns like a lamb’s but spoke like a dragon. 
    12: 
    13: The First Beast. 1 Then I saw a beast come out of the sea with ten horns and seven heads; on its horns were ten diadems, and on its heads blasphemous name[s]. 2 The beast I saw was like a leopard, but it had feet like a bear’s, and its mouth was like the mouth of a lion.[b] To it the dragon gave its own power and throne, along with great authority. 3 I saw that one of its heads seemed to have been mortally wounded, but this mortal wound was healed.[c] Fascinated, the whole world followed after the beast. 4 They worshiped the dragon because it gave its authority to the beast; they also worshiped the beast[d] and said, “Who can compare with the beast or who can fight against it?”
5 [e]The beast was given a mouth uttering proud boasts and blasphemies, and it was given authority to act for forty-two months.[f] 6 It opened its mouth to utter blasphemies against God, blaspheming his name and his dwelling and those who dwell in heaven. 7 It was also allowed to wage war against the holy ones and conquer them, and it was granted authority over every tribe, people, tongue, and nation. 8 All the inhabitants of the earth will worship it, all whose names were not written from the foundation of the world in the book of life, which belongs to the Lamb who was slain.
9 
Whoever has ears ought to hear these words.
10 
Anyone destined for captivity goes into captivity.
Anyone destined to be slain by the sword shall be slain by the sword.
Such is the faithful endurance of the holy ones.
The Second Beast.[g] 11 Then I saw another beast come up out of the earth; it had two horns like a lamb’s but spoke like a dragon. 12 It wielded all the authority of the first beast in its sight and made the earth and its inhabitants worship the first beast, whose mortal wound had been healed. 13 It performed great signs, even making fire come down from heaven to earth in the sight of everyone. 
    14: It deceived the inhabitants of the earth with the signs it was allowed to perform in the sight of the first beast, telling them to make an image for the beast who had been wounded by the sword and revived. 
    15: It was then permitted to breathe life into the beast’s image, so that the beast’s image could speak and  have anyone who did not worship it put to death. 
    16: It forced all the people, small and great, rich and poor, free and slave, to be given a stamped image on their right hands or their foreheads, 
    17: so that no one could buy or sell except one who had the stamped image of the beast’s name or the number that stood for its name.

    18: Wisdom is needed here; one who understands can calculate the number of the beast, for it is a number that stands for a person. His number is six hundred and sixty-six.


  Chapter 14.

    1: 
The Lamb’s Companions. 1 Then I looked and there was the Lamb standing on Mount Zion,[b] and with him a hundred and forty-four thousand who had his name and his Father’s name written on their foreheads. 
    2: I heard a sound from heaven like the sound of rushing water or a loud peal of thunder. The sound I heard was like that of harpists playing their harps. 
    3: 
    4: The Lamb’s Companions. 1 Then I looked and there was the Lamb standing on Mount Zion,[b] and with him a hundred and forty-four thousand who had his name and his Father’s name written on their foreheads. 2 I heard a sound from heaven like the sound of rushing water or a loud peal of thunder. The sound I heard was like that of harpists playing their harps. 3 They were singing [what seemed to be] a new hymn before the throne, before the four living creatures and the elders. No one could learn this hymn except the hundred and forty-four thousand who had been ransomed from the earth. 4 These are they who were not defiled with women; they are virgins[c] and these are the ones who follow the Lamb wherever he goes. They have been ransomed as the firstfruits of the human race for God and the Lamb. 
    5: On their lips no deceit has been found; they are unblemished.
The Three Angels.[e] 
    6: Then I saw another angel flying high overhead, with everlasting good news to announce to those who dwell on earth, to every nation, tribe, tongue, and people. 
    7: He said in a loud voice, “Fear God and give him glory, for his time has come to sit in judgment. Worship him who made heaven and earth and sea and springs of water.”

    8: A second angel followed, saying:
“Fallen, fallen is Babylon the great,
    that made all the nations drink
    the wine of her licentious passion.”

    9:  third angel followed them and said in a loud voice, “Anyone who worships the beast or its image, or accepts its mark on forehead or hand, 
    10: will also drink the wine of God’s fury, poured full strength into the cup of his wrath, and will be tormented in burning sulfur before the holy angels and before the Lamb. 
    11: The smoke of the fire that torments them will rise forever and ever, and there will be no relief day or night for those who worship the beast or its image or accept the mark of its name.” 
    12: Here is what sustains the holy ones who keep God’s commandments and their faith in Jesus.

    13: 
    14: The Lamb’s Companions. 1 Then I looked and there was the Lamb standing on Mount Zion,[b] and with him a hundred and forty-four thousand who had his name and his Father’s name written on their foreheads. 2 I heard a sound from heaven like the sound of rushing water or a loud peal of thunder. The sound I heard was like that of harpists playing their harps. 3 They were singing [what seemed to be] a new hymn before the throne, before the four living creatures and the elders. No one could learn this hymn except the hundred and forty-four thousand who had been ransomed from the earth. 4 These are they who were not defiled with women; they are virgins[c] and these are the ones who follow the Lamb wherever he goes. They have been ransomed as the firstfruits of the human race for God and the Lamb. 5 On their lips no deceit[d] has been found; they are unblemished.
The Three Angels.[e] 6 Then I saw another angel flying high overhead, with everlasting good news[f] to announce to those who dwell on earth, to every nation, tribe, tongue, and people. 7 He said in a loud voice, “Fear God and give him glory, for his time has come to sit in judgment. Worship him who made heaven and earth and sea and springs of water.”
8 A second angel followed, saying:
“Fallen, fallen is Babylon the great,
    that made all the nations drink
    the wine of her licentious passion.”[g]
9 A third angel followed them and said in a loud voice, “Anyone who worships the beast or its image, or accepts its mark on forehead or hand, 10 will also drink the wine of God’s fury,[h] poured full strength into the cup of his wrath, and will be tormented in burning sulfur before the holy angels and before the Lamb. 11 The smoke of the fire that torments them will rise forever and ever, and there will be no relief day or night for those who worship the beast or its image or accept the mark of its name.” 12 Here is what sustains the holy ones who keep God’s commandments and their faith in Jesus.[i]
13 I heard a voice from heaven say, “Write this: Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord from now on.” “Yes,” said the Spirit, “let them find rest from their labors, for their works accompany them.”[j]
The Harvest of the Earth.[k] 14 Then I looked and there was a white cloud, and sitting on the cloud one who looked like a son of man, with a gold crown on his head and a sharp sickle in his hand. 
    15: Another angel came out of the temple, crying out in a loud voice to the one sitting on the cloud, “Use your sickle and reap the harvest, for the time to reap has come, because the earth’s harvest is fully ripe.” 
    16: So the one who was sitting on the cloud swung his sickle over the earth, and the earth was harvested.

    17: Then another angel came out of the temple in heaven who also had a sharp sickle. 
    18: Then another angel  from the altar,[l] [who] was in charge of the fire, and cried out in a loud voice to the one who had the sharp sickle, “Use your sharp sickle and cut the clusters from the earth’s vines, for its grapes are ripe.” 
    19: So the angel swung his sickle over the earth and cut the earth’s vintage. He threw it into the great wine press of God’s fury. 
    20: The wine press was trodden outside the city and blood poured out of the wine press to the height of a horse’s bridle for two hundred miles.


  Chapter 15.

    1: 
The Seven Last Plagues. 1 Then I saw in heaven another sign,[b] great and awe-inspiring: seven angels with the seven last plagues, for through them God’s fury is accomplished.

    2: Then I saw something like a sea of glass mingled with fire. On the sea of glass were standing those who had won the victory over the beast and its image and the number that signified its name. They were holding God’s harps, 
    3: and they sang the song of Moses, the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb:
“Great and wonderful are your works,
    Lord God almighty.
Just and true are your ways,
    O king of the nations.

    4: 
    5: The Seven Last Plagues. 1 Then I saw in heaven another sign,[b] great and awe-inspiring: seven angels with the seven last plagues, for through them God’s fury is accomplished.
2 Then I saw something like a sea of glass mingled with fire.[c] On the sea of glass were standing those who had won the victory over the beast and its image and the number that signified its name. They were holding God’s harps, 3 and they sang the song of Moses,[d] the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb:
“Great and wonderful are your works,
    Lord God almighty.
Just and true are your ways,
    O king of the nations.
4 
Who will not fear you, Lord,
    or glorify your name?
For you alone are holy.
    All the nations will come
    and worship before you,
    for your righteous acts have been revealed.”
5 [e]After this I had another vision. The temple that is the heavenly tent of testimony[f] opened, 
    6: and the seven angels with the seven plagues came out of the temple. They were dressed in clean white linen, with a gold sash around their chests. 
    7: One of the four living creatures gave the seven angels seven gold bowls filled with the fury of God, who lives forever and ever. 
    8: Then the temple became so filled with the smoke from God’s glory and might that no one could enter it until the seven plagues of the seven angels had been accomplished.


  Chapter 16.

    1: 
The Seven Bowls. 1 I heard a loud voice speaking from the temple to the seven angels, “Go and pour out the seven bowls of God’s fury upon the earth.”

    2: The first angel went and poured out his bowl on the earth. Festering and ugly sores broke out on those who had the mark of the beast or worshiped its image.

    3: The second angel poured out his bowl on the sea. The sea turned to blood like that from a corpse; every creature living in the sea died.

    4: The third angel poured out his bowl on the rivers and springs of water. These also turned to blood. 
    5: 
    6: The Seven Bowls. 1 I heard a loud voice speaking from the temple to the seven angels, “Go and pour out the seven bowls of God’s fury upon the earth.”
2 The first angel went and poured out his bowl on the earth. Festering and ugly sores broke out on those who had the mark of the beast or worshiped its image.[b]
3 [c]The second angel poured out his bowl on the sea. The sea turned to blood like that from a corpse; every creature living in the sea died.
4 The third angel poured out his bowl on the rivers and springs of water. These also turned to blood. 5 Then I heard the angel in charge of the waters say:
“You are just, O Holy One,
    who are and who were,
    in passing this sentence.
6 
For they have shed the blood of the holy ones and the prophets,
    and you [have] given them blood to drink;
    it is what they deserve.”

    7: Then I heard the altar cry out,
“Yes, Lord God almighty,
    your judgments are true and just.”

    8: The fourth angel poured out his bowl on the sun. It was given the power to burn people with fire. 
    9: eople were burned by the scorching heat and blasphemed the name of God who had power over these plagues, but they did not repent or give him glory.

    10: The fifth angel poured out his bowl on the throne of the beast. Its kingdom was plunged into darkness, and people bit their tongues in pain 
    11: and blasphemed the God of heaven because of their pains and sores. But they did not repent of their works.

    12: The sixth angel emptied his bowl on the great river Euphrates. Its water was dried up to prepare the way for the kings of the East. 
    13: I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come from the mouth of the dragon, from the mouth of the beast, and from the mouth of the false prophet. 
    14: These were demonic spirits who performed signs. They went out to the kings of the whole world to assemble them for the battle on the great day of God the almighty. 
    15: 
    16: The Seven Bowls. 1 I heard a loud voice speaking from the temple to the seven angels, “Go and pour out the seven bowls of God’s fury upon the earth.”
2 The first angel went and poured out his bowl on the earth. Festering and ugly sores broke out on those who had the mark of the beast or worshiped its image.[b]
3 [c]The second angel poured out his bowl on the sea. The sea turned to blood like that from a corpse; every creature living in the sea died.
4 The third angel poured out his bowl on the rivers and springs of water. These also turned to blood. 5 Then I heard the angel in charge of the waters say:
“You are just, O Holy One,
    who are and who were,
    in passing this sentence.
6 
For they have shed the blood of the holy ones and the prophets,
    and you [have] given them blood to drink;
    it is what they deserve.”
7 Then I heard the altar cry out,
“Yes, Lord God almighty,
    your judgments are true and just.”
8 The fourth angel poured out his bowl on the sun. It was given the power to burn people with fire. 9 People were burned by the scorching heat and blasphemed the name of God who had power over these plagues, but they did not repent or give him glory.
10 The fifth angel poured out his bowl on the throne of the beast.[d] Its kingdom was plunged into darkness, and people bit their tongues in pain 11 and blasphemed the God of heaven because of their pains and sores. But they did not repent of their works.
12 The sixth angel emptied his bowl on the great river Euphrates. Its water was dried up to prepare the way for the kings of the East.[e] 13 I saw three unclean spirits like frogs[f] come from the mouth of the dragon, from the mouth of the beast, and from the mouth of the false prophet. 14 These were demonic spirits who performed signs. They went out to the kings of the whole world to assemble them for the battle on the great day of God the almighty. 15 (“Behold, I am coming like a thief.”[g] Blessed is the one who watches and keeps his clothes ready, so that he may not go naked and people see him exposed.) 16 They then assembled the kings in the place that is named Armageddon[h] in Hebrew.

    17: The seventh angel poured out his bowl into the air. A loud voice came out of the temple from the throne, saying, “It is done.” 
    18: Then there were lightning flashes, rumblings, and peals of thunder, and a great earthquake. It was such a violent earthquake that there has never been one like it since the human race began on earth. 
    19: The great city was split into three parts, and the gentile cities fell. But God remembered great Babylon, giving it the cup filled with the wine of his fury and wrath. 
    20: Every island fled, and mountains disappeared. 
    21: Large hailstones like huge weights came down from the sky on people, and they blasphemed God for the plague of hail because this plague was so severe.


End of day 356.