Day 335:

Reading 1-Timothy, chapters ['5', '6']:

  Chapter 5.

    1: Do not rebuke an older man, but appeal to him as a father. Treat younger men as brothers, 
    2: older women as mothers, and younger women as sisters with complete purity.
Rules for Widows. 
    3: Honor widows who are truly widows. 
    4: 
    5: 1 Do not rebuke an older man, but appeal to him as a father. Treat younger men as brothers, 2 older women as mothers, and younger women as sisters with complete purity.
Rules for Widows. 3 Honor widows who are truly widows. 4 But if a widow has children or grandchildren, let these first learn to perform their religious duty to their own family and to make recompense to their parents, for this is pleasing to God. 5 The real widow, who is all alone, has set her hope on God and continues in supplications and prayers night and day. 
    6: But the one who is self-indulgent is dead while she lives. 
    7: Command this, so that they may be irreproachable. 
    8: And whoever does not provide for relatives and especially family members has denied the faith and is worse than an unbeliever.

    9: et a widow be enrolled if she is not less than sixty years old, married only once, 
    10: with a reputation for good works, namely, that she has raised children, practiced hospitality, washed the feet of the holy ones, helped those in distress, involved herself in every good work. 
    11: But exclude younger widows, for when their sensuality estranges them from Christ, they want to marry 
    12: and will incur condemnation for breaking their first pledge. 
    13: And furthermore, they learn to be idlers, going about from house to house, and not only idlers but gossips and busybodies as well, talking about things that ought not to be mentioned. 
    14: So I would like younger widows to marry, have children, and manage a home, so as to give the adversary no pretext for maligning us. 
    15: For some have already turned away to follow Satan. 
    16: If any woman believer has widowed relatives, she must assist them; the church is not to be burdened, so that it will be able to help those who are truly widows.
Rules for Presbyters.[c] 
    17: Presbyters who preside well deserve double honor, especially those who toil in preaching and teaching. 
    18: For the scripture says, “You shall not muzzle an ox when it is threshing,” and, “A worker deserves his pay.” 
    19: Do not accept an accusation against a presbyter unless it is supported by two or three witnesses. 
    20: Reprimand publicly those who do sin, so that the rest also will be afraid. 
    21: I charge you before God and Christ Jesus and the elect angels to keep these rules without prejudice, doing nothing out of favoritism. 
    22: Do not lay hands too readily on anyone, and do not share in another’s sins. Keep yourself pure. 
    23: Stop drinking only water, but have a little wine for the sake of your stomach and your frequent illnesses.

    24: Some people’s sins are public, preceding them to judgment; but other people are followed by their sins. 
    25: Similarly, good works are also public; and even those that are not cannot remain hidden.


  Chapter 6.

    1: Those who are under the yoke of slavery must regard their masters as worthy of full respect, so that the name of God and our teaching[b] may not suffer abuse. 
    2: Those whose masters are believers must not take advantage of them because they are brothers but must give better service because those who will profit from their work are believers and are beloved.
V. False Teaching and True Wealth
Teach and urge these things. 
    3: Whoever teaches something different and does not agree with the sound words of our Lord Jesus Christ and the religious teaching 
    4: is conceited, understanding nothing, and has a morbid disposition for arguments and verbal disputes. From these come envy, rivalry, insults, evil suspicions, 
    5: 
    6: Rules for Slaves. 1 Those who are under the yoke of slavery must regard their masters as worthy of full respect, so that the name of God and our teaching[b] may not suffer abuse. 2 Those whose masters are believers must not take advantage of them because they are brothers but must give better service because those who will profit from their work are believers and are beloved.
V. False Teaching and True Wealth
Teach and urge these things.[c] 3 Whoever teaches something different and does not agree with the sound words of our Lord Jesus Christ and the religious teaching 4 is conceited, understanding nothing, and has a morbid disposition for arguments and verbal disputes. From these come envy, rivalry, insults, evil suspicions, 5 and mutual friction among people with corrupted minds, who are deprived of the truth, supposing religion to be a means of gain. 6 [d]Indeed, religion with contentment is a great gain. 
    7: For we brought nothing into the world, just as we shall not be able to take anything out of it. 
    8: If we have food and clothing, we shall be content with that. 
    9: hose who want to be rich are falling into temptation and into a trap and into many foolish and harmful desires, which plunge them into ruin and destruction. 
    10: For the love of money is the root of all evils, and some people in their desire for it have strayed from the faith and have pierced themselves with many pains.
Exhortations to Timothy. 
    11: But you, man of God, avoid all this. Instead, pursue righteousness, devotion, faith, love, patience, and gentleness. 
    12: Compete well for the faith. Lay hold of eternal life, to which you were called when you made the noble confession in the presence of many witnesses. 
    13: I charge  before God, who gives life to all things, and before Christ Jesus, who gave testimony under Pontius Pilate for the noble confession, 
    14: to keep the commandment without stain or reproach until the appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ 
    15: that the blessed and only ruler will make manifest at the proper time, the King of kings and Lord of lords, 
    16: who alone has immortality, who dwells in unapproachable light, and whom no human being has seen or can see. To him be honor and eternal power. Amen.
Right Use of Wealth. 
    17: Tell the rich in the present age not to be proud and not to rely on so uncertain a thing as wealth but rather on God, who richly provides us with all things for our enjoyment. 
    18: Tell them to do good, to be rich in good works, to be generous, ready to share, 
    19: thus accumulating as treasure a good foundation for the future, so as to win the life that is true life.
VI. Final Recommendation and Warning

    20: O Timothy, guard what has been entrusted to you. Avoid profane babbling and the absurdities of so-called knowledge. 
    21: By professing it, some people have deviated from the faith.
Grace be with all of you.


End of day 335.