Day 117:

Reading Judith, chapters ['1', '2', '3', '4']:

  Chapter 1.

    1: Nebuchadnezzar Against Arphaxad. 1 It was the twelfth year[c] of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar, who ruled over the Assyrians in the great city of Nineveh. At that time Arphaxad was ruling over the Medes in Ecbatana. 
    2: Around Ecbatana he built a wall of hewn stones, three cubits thick and six cubits long. He made the walls seventy cubits high and fifty cubits wide. 
    3: At its gates he raised towers one hundred cubits high with foundations sixty cubits wide. 
    4: He made its gates seventy cubits high and forty cubits wide to allow passage of his mighty forces, with his infantry in formation. 
    5: At that time King Nebuchadnezzar waged war against King Arphaxad in the vast plain that borders Ragau. 
    6: Rallying to him were all who lived in the hill country, all who lived along the Euphrates, the Tigris, and the Hydaspes, as well as Arioch, king of the Elamites, in the plains. Thus many nations joined the ranks of the Chelodites.

    7: Then Nebuchadnezzar, king of the Assyrians, contacted all the inhabitants of Persia and all who lived in the west, the inhabitants of Cilicia and Damascus, Lebanon and Antilebanon, and all who lived along the seacoast, 
    8: the peoples of Carmel, Gilead, Upper Galilee, and the vast plain of Esdraelon, 
    9: nd all in Samaria and its cities, and west of the Jordan as far as Jerusalem, Bethany, Chelous, Kadesh, and the river of Egypt; Tahpanhes, Raamses, all the land of Goshen, 
    10: Tanis, Memphis and beyond, and all the inhabitants of Egypt as far as the borders of Ethiopia.

    11: But all the inhabitants of the whole land made light of the summons of Nebuchadnezzar, king of the Assyrians, and would not join him in the war. They were not afraid of him, since he was only a single opponent. So they sent back his envoys empty-handed and disgraced. 
    12: Then Nebuchadnezzar fell into a violent rage against all the land, and swore by his throne and his kingdom that he would take revenge on all the territories of Cilicia, Damascus, and Syria, and would destroy with his sword all the inhabitants of Moab, Ammon, the whole of Judea, and all those living in Egypt as far as the coasts of the two seas.
Defeat of Arphaxad. 
    13: In the seventeenth year he mustered his forces against King Arphaxad and was victorious in his campaign. He routed the whole force of Arphaxad, his entire cavalry, and all his chariots, 
    14: and took possession of his cities. He pressed on to Ecbatana, took its towers, sacked its marketplaces, and turned its glory into shame. 
    15: He captured Arphaxad in the mountains of Ragau, ran him through with spears, and utterly destroyed him once and for all. 
    16: Then he returned to Nineveh with all his consolidated forces, a very great multitude of warriors; and there he and his forces relaxed and feasted for one hundred and twenty days.


  Chapter 2.

    1: 
    2: Revenge Planned Against the Western Nations. 1 In the eighteenth year,[b] on the twenty-second day of the first month, there was a discussion in the palace of Nebuchadnezzar, king of the Assyrians, about taking revenge on all the land, as he had threatened. 2 He summoned all his attendants and officers, laid before them his secret plan, and with his own lips recounted in full detail the wickedness of all the land. 
    3: They decided to destroy all who had refused to obey the order he had issued.

    4: When he had fully recounted his plan, Nebuchadnezzar, king of the Assyrians, summoned Holofernes, the ranking general of his forces, second only to himself in command, and said to him: 
    5: “Thus says the great king, the lord of all the earth: Go forth from my presence, take with you men of proven valor, one hundred and twenty thousand infantry and twelve thousand cavalry, 
    6: and proceed against all the land of the west, because they disobeyed the order I issued. 
    7: Tell them to have earth and water ready, for I will come against them in my wrath; I will cover all the land with the feet of my soldiers, to whom I will deliver them as spoils. 
    8: Their wounded will fill their ravines and wadies, the swelling river will be choked with their dead; 
    9: nd I will deport them as exiles to the very ends of the earth.

    10: “Go before me and take possession of all their territories for me. If they surrender to you, guard them for me until the day of their sentencing. 
    11: As for those who disobey, show them no mercy, but deliver them up to slaughter and plunder in all the land you occupy. 
    12: For as I live, and by the strength of my kingdom, what I have spoken I will accomplish by my own hand. 
    13: Do not disobey a single one of the orders of your lord; fulfill them exactly as I have commanded you, and do it without delay.”
Campaigns of Holofernes. 
    14: So Holofernes left the presence of his lord, and summoned all the commanders, generals, and officers of the Assyrian forces. 
    15: He mustered one hundred and twenty thousand picked troops, as his lord had commanded, and twelve thousand mounted archers, 
    16: and drew them up as a vast force organized for battle. 
    17: He took along a very large number of camels, donkeys, and mules for carrying their supplies; innumerable sheep, cattle, and goats for their food; 
    18: abundant provisions for each man, and much gold and silver from the royal palace.

    19: Then he and all his forces set out on their expedition in advance of King Nebuchadnezzar, to overrun all the lands of the western region with their chariots, cavalry, and picked infantry. 
    20: A huge, irregular force, too many to count, like locusts, like the dust of the earth, went along with them.

    21: After a three-day march from Nineveh, they reached the plain of Bectileth, and camped opposite Bectileth near the mountains to the north of Upper Cilicia. 
    22: From there Holofernes took all his forces, the infantry, cavalry, and chariots, and marched into the hill country. 
    23: He devastated Put and Lud, and plundered all the Rassisites and the Ishmaelites on the border of the wilderness toward the south of the Chelleans.

    24: Then, following the Euphrates, he went through Mesopotamia, and battered down every fortified city along the Wadi Abron, until he reached the sea. 
    25: He seized the territory of Cilicia, and cut down everyone who resisted him. Then he proceeded to the southern borders of Japheth, toward Arabia. 
    26: He surrounded all the Midianites, burned their tents, and sacked their encampments. 
    27: Descending to the plain of Damascus at the time of the wheat harvest, he set fire to all their fields, destroyed their flocks and herds, looted their cities, devastated their plains, and put all their young men to the sword.

    28: Fear and dread of him fell upon all the inhabitants of the coastland, upon those in Sidon and Tyre, and those who dwelt in Sur and Ocina, and the inhabitants of Jamnia. Those in Azotus and Ascalon also feared him greatly.


  Chapter 3.

    1: So they sent messengers to him to sue for peace in these words: 
    2: 
    3: Submission of the Vassal Nations. 1 So they sent messengers to him to sue for peace in these words: 2 “We, the servants of Nebuchadnezzar the great king, lie prostrate before you; do with us as you will. 3 See, our dwellings and all our land and every wheat field, our flocks and herds, and all our encampments are at your disposal; make use of them as you please. 
    4: Our cities and their inhabitants are also at your service; come and deal with them as you see fit.”

    5: After the spokesmen had reached Holofernes and given him this message, 
    6: he went down with his forces to the seacoast, stationed garrisons in the fortified cities, and took selected men from them as auxiliaries. 
    7: The people of these cities and all the inhabitants of the countryside received him with garlands and dancing to the sound of timbrels. 
    8: But he devastated their whole territory and cut down their sacred groves, for he was allowed to destroy all the gods of the land, so that every nation might worship only Nebuchadnezzar, and all their tongues and tribes should invoke him as a god. 
    9: t length Holofernes reached Esdraelon in the neighborhood of Dothan, the approach to the main ridge of the Judean mountains; 
    10: he set up his camp between Geba and Scythopolis, and stayed there a whole month to replenish all the supplies of his forces.


  Chapter 4.

    1: When the Israelites who lived in Judea heard of all that Holofernes, the ranking general of Nebuchadnezzar king of the Assyrians, had done to the nations, and how he had looted all their shrines and utterly destroyed them, 
    2: they were in very great fear of him, and greatly alarmed for Jerusalem and the temple of the Lord, their God. 
    3: 
    4: Israel Prepares for War. 1 When the Israelites who lived in Judea heard of all that Holofernes, the ranking general of Nebuchadnezzar king of the Assyrians, had done to the nations, and how he had looted all their shrines[c] and utterly destroyed them, 2 they were in very great fear of him, and greatly alarmed for Jerusalem and the temple of the Lord, their God. 3 Now, they had only recently returned from exile, and all the people of Judea were just now reunited, and the vessels, the altar, and the temple had been purified from profanation.[d] 4 So they sent word to the whole region of Samaria, to Kona, Beth-horon, Belmain, and Jericho, to Choba and Aesora, and to the valley of Salem.[e] 
    5: The people there secured all the high hilltops, fortified the villages on them, and since their fields had recently been harvested, stored up provisions in preparation for war.

    6: Joakim, who was high priest in Jerusalem in those days, wrote to the inhabitants of Bethulia and Betomesthaim, which is opposite Esdraelon, facing the plain near Dothan, 
    7: and instructed them to keep firm hold of the mountain passes, since these offered access to Judea. It would be easy to stop those advancing, as the approach was only wide enough for two at a time. 
    8: The Israelites carried out the orders given them by Joakim, the high priest, and the senate of the whole people of Israel, in session in Jerusalem.
Israel at Prayer. 
    9: ll the men of Israel cried to God with great fervor and humbled themselves. 
    10: They, along with their wives, and children, and domestic animals, every resident alien, hired worker, and purchased slave, girded themselves with sackcloth. 
    11: And all the Israelite men, women, and children who lived in Jerusalem fell prostrate in front of the temple and sprinkled ashes on their heads, spreading out their sackcloth before the Lord. 
    12: The altar, too, they draped in sackcloth; and with one accord they cried out fervently to the God of Israel not to allow their children to be seized, their wives to be taken captive, the cities of their inheritance to be ruined, or the sanctuary to be profaned and mocked for the nations to gloat over.

    13: The Lord heard their cry and saw their distress. The people continued fasting for many days throughout Judea and before the sanctuary of the Lord Almighty in Jerusalem. 
    14: Also girded with sackcloth, Joakim, the high priest, and all the priests in attendance before the Lord, and those who ministered to the Lord offered the daily burnt offering, the votive offerings, and the voluntary offerings of the people. 
    15: With ashes upon their turbans, they cried to the Lord with all their strength to look with favor on the whole house of Israel.


End of day 117.