Day 303:

Reading John, chapters ['13', '14', '15', '16']:

  Chapter 13.

    1: 
The Washing of the Disciples’ Feet. 1 Before the feast of Passover,[c] Jesus knew that his hour had come to pass from this world to the Father. He loved his own in the world and he loved them to the end. 
    2: 
    3: The Washing of the Disciples’ Feet. 1 Before the feast of Passover,[c] Jesus knew that his hour had come to pass from this world to the Father. He loved his own in the world and he loved them to the end. 2 The devil had already induced[d] Judas, son of Simon the Iscariot, to hand him over. So, during supper, 3 fully aware that the Father had put everything into his power and that he had come from God and was returning to God, 
    4: he rose from supper and took off his outer garments. He took a towel and tied it around his waist. 
    5: Then he poured water into a basin and began to wash the disciples’ feet and dry them with the towel around his waist. 
    6: He came to Simon Peter, who said to him, “Master, are you going to wash my feet?” 
    7: Jesus answered and said to him, “What I am doing, you do not understand now, but you will understand later.” 
    8: Peter said to him, “You will never wash my feet.” Jesus answered him, “Unless I wash you, you will have no inheritance with me.” 
    9: imon Peter said to him, “Master, then not only my feet, but my hands and head as well.” 
    10: Jesus said to him, “Whoever has bathed has no need except to have his feet washed, for he is clean all over; so you are clean, but not all.” 
    11: For he knew who would betray him; for this reason, he said, “Not all of you are clean.”

    12: 
    13: The Washing of the Disciples’ Feet. 1 Before the feast of Passover,[c] Jesus knew that his hour had come to pass from this world to the Father. He loved his own in the world and he loved them to the end. 2 The devil had already induced[d] Judas, son of Simon the Iscariot, to hand him over. So, during supper, 3 fully aware that the Father had put everything into his power and that he had come from God and was returning to God, 4 he rose from supper and took off his outer garments. He took a towel and tied it around his waist. 5 [e]Then he poured water into a basin and began to wash the disciples’ feet and dry them with the towel around his waist. 6 He came to Simon Peter, who said to him, “Master, are you going to wash my feet?” 7 Jesus answered and said to him, “What I am doing, you do not understand now, but you will understand later.” 8 Peter said to him, “You will never wash my feet.” Jesus answered him, “Unless I wash you, you will have no inheritance with me.” 9 Simon Peter said to him, “Master, then not only my feet, but my hands and head as well.” 10 Jesus said to him, “Whoever has bathed[f] has no need except to have his feet washed, for he is clean all over; so you are clean, but not all.” 11 For he knew who would betray him; for this reason, he said, “Not all of you are clean.”
12 So when he had washed their feet [and] put his garments back on and reclined at table again, he said to them, “Do you realize what I have done for you? 13 You call me ‘teacher’ and ‘master,’ and rightly so, for indeed I am. 
    14: If I, therefore, the master and teacher, have washed your feet, you ought to wash one another’s feet. 
    15: I have given you a model to follow, so that as I have done for you, you should also do. 
    16: Amen, amen, I say to you, no slave is greater than his master nor any messenger greater than the one who sent him. 
    17: If you understand this, blessed are you if you do it. 
    18: I am not speaking of all of you. I know those whom I have chosen. But so that the scripture might be fulfilled, ‘The one who ate my food has raised his heel against me.’ 
    19: From now on I am telling you before it happens, so that when it happens you may believe that I AM. 
    20: Amen, amen, I say to you, whoever receives the one I send receives me, and whoever receives me receives the one who sent me.”
Announcement of Judas’s Betrayal. 
    21: When he had said this, Jesus was deeply troubled and testified, “Amen, amen, I say to you, one of you will betray me.” 
    22: The disciples looked at one another, at a loss as to whom he meant. 
    23: One of his disciples, the one whom Jesus loved, was reclining at Jesus’ side. 
    24: So Simon Peter nodded to him to find out whom he meant. 
    25: He leaned back against Jesus’ chest and said to him, “Master, who is it?” 
    26: Jesus answered, “It is the one to whom I hand the morsel after I have dipped it.” So he dipped the morsel and [took it and] handed it to Judas, son of Simon the Iscariot. 
    27: After he took the morsel, Satan entered him. So Jesus said to him, “What you are going to do, do quickly.” 
    28:  none of those reclining at table realized why he said this to him. 
    29: Some thought that since Judas kept the money bag, Jesus had told him, “Buy what we need for the feast,” or to give something to the poor. 
    30: So he took the morsel and left at once. And it was night.
The New Commandment. 
    31: When he had left, Jesus said,[k] “Now is the Son of Man glorified, and God is glorified in him. 
    32:  God will also glorify him in himself, and he will glorify him at once. 
    33: My children, I will be with you only a little while longer. You will look for me, and as I told the Jews, ‘Where I go you cannot come,’ so now I say it to you. 
    34: I give you a new commandment: love one another. As I have loved you, so you also should love one another. 
    35: This is how all will know that you are my disciples, if you have love for one another.”
Peter’s Denial Predicted. 
    36: Simon Peter said to him, “Master, where are you going?” Jesus answered , “Where I am going, you cannot follow me now, though you will follow later.” 
    37: Peter said to him, “Master, why can’t I follow you now? I will lay down my life for you.” 
    38: Jesus answered, “Will you lay down your life for me? Amen, amen, I say to you, the cock will not crow before you deny me three times.”


  Chapter 14.

    1: 
Last Supper Discourses. 1 “Do not let your hearts be troubled. You have faith[b] in God; have faith also in me. 
    2: In my Father’s house there are many dwelling places. If there were not, would I have told you that I am going to prepare a place for you? 
    3: 
    4: Last Supper Discourses. 1 “Do not let your hearts be troubled. You have faith[b] in God; have faith also in me. 2 In my Father’s house there are many dwelling places. If there were not, would I have told you that I am going to prepare a place for you? 3 [c]And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come back again and take you to myself, so that where I am you also may be. 4 Where [I] am going you know the way.”[d] 
    5: Thomas said to him, “Master, we do not know where you are going; how can we know the way?” 
    6: Jesus said to him, “I am the way and the truth and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me. 
    7: If you know me, then you will also know my Father. From now on you do know him and have seen him.” 
    8: Philip said to him, “Master, show us the Father, and that will be enough for us.” 
    9: esus said to him, “Have I been with you for so long a time and you still do not know me, Philip? Whoever has seen me has seen the Father. How can you say, ‘Show us the Father’? 
    10: Do you not believe that I am in the Father and the Father is in me? The words that I speak to you I do not speak on my own. The Father who dwells in me is doing his works. 
    11: Believe me that I am in the Father and the Father is in me, or else, believe because of the works themselves. 
    12: Amen, amen, I say to you, whoever believes in me will do the works that I do, and will do greater ones than these, because I am going to the Father. 
    13: 
    14: Last Supper Discourses. 1 “Do not let your hearts be troubled. You have faith[b] in God; have faith also in me. 2 In my Father’s house there are many dwelling places. If there were not, would I have told you that I am going to prepare a place for you? 3 [c]And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come back again and take you to myself, so that where I am you also may be. 4 Where [I] am going you know the way.”[d] 5 Thomas said to him, “Master, we do not know where you are going; how can we know the way?” 6 Jesus said to him, “I am the way and the truth[e] and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me. 7 If you know me, then you will also know my Father.[f] From now on you do know him and have seen him.” 8 Philip said to him, “Master, show us the Father,[g] and that will be enough for us.” 9 Jesus said to him, “Have I been with you for so long a time and you still do not know me, Philip? Whoever has seen me has seen the Father. How can you say, ‘Show us the Father’? 10 Do you not believe that I am in the Father and the Father is in me? The words that I speak to you I do not speak on my own. The Father who dwells in me is doing his works. 11 Believe me that I am in the Father and the Father is in me, or else, believe because of the works themselves. 12 Amen, amen, I say to you, whoever believes in me will do the works that I do, and will do greater ones than these, because I am going to the Father. 13 And whatever you ask in my name, I will do, so that the Father may be glorified in the Son. 14 If you ask anything of me in my name, I will do it.
The Advocate. 
    15: “If you love me, you will keep my commandments. 
    16: And I will ask the Father, and he will give you another Advocate to be with you always, 
    17: the Spirit of truth, which the world cannot accept, because it neither sees nor knows it. But you know it, because it remains with you, and will be in you. 
    18: I will not leave you orphans; I will come to you. 
    19: In a little while the world will no longer see me, but you will see me, because I live and you will live. 
    20: On that day you will realize that I am in my Father and you are in me and I in you. 
    21: Whoever has my commandments and observes them is the one who loves me. And whoever loves me will be loved by my Father, and I will love him and reveal myself to him.” 
    22: Judas, not the Iscariot, said to him, “Master, [then] what happened that you will reveal yourself to us and not to the world?” 
    23: Jesus answered and said to him, “Whoever loves me will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our dwelling with him. 
    24: Whoever does not love me does not keep my words; yet the word you hear is not mine but that of the Father who sent me.

    25: “I have told you this while I am with you. 
    26: The Advocate, the holy Spirit that the Father will send in my name—he will teach you everything and remind you of all that  told you. 
    27: Peace I leave with you; my peace I give to you. Not as the world gives do I give it to you. Do not let your hearts be troubled or afraid. 
    28: You heard me tell you, ‘I am going away and I will come back to you.’ If you loved me, you would rejoice that I am going to the Father; for the Father is greater than I. 
    29: And now I have told you this before it happens, so that when it happens you may believe. 
    30: I will no longer speak much with you, for the ruler of the world is coming. He has no power over me, 
    31: but the world must know that I love the Father and that I do just as the Father has commanded me. Get up, let us go.


  Chapter 15.

    1: 
The Vine and the Branches. 1 “I am the true vine,[b] and my Father is the vine grower. 
    2: He takes away every branch in me that does not bear fruit, and every one that does he prunes so that it bears more fruit. 
    3: You are already pruned because of the word that I spoke to you. 
    4: 
    5: The Vine and the Branches. 1 “I am the true vine,[b] and my Father is the vine grower. 2 He takes away every branch in me that does not bear fruit, and every one that does he prunes[c] so that it bears more fruit. 3 You are already pruned because of the word that I spoke to you. 4 Remain in me, as I remain in you. Just as a branch cannot bear fruit on its own unless it remains on the vine, so neither can you unless you remain in me. 5 I am the vine, you are the branches. Whoever remains in me and I in him will bear much fruit, because without me you can do nothing. 
    6: Anyone who does not remain in me will be thrown out like a branch and wither; people will gather them and throw them into a fire and they will be burned. 
    7: If you remain in me and my words remain in you, ask for whatever you want and it will be done for you. 
    8: By this is my Father glorified, that you bear much fruit and become my disciples. 
    9: s the Father loves me, so I also love you. Remain in my love. 
    10: If you keep my commandments, you will remain in my love, just as I have kept my Father’s commandments and remain in his love.

    11: “I have told you this so that my joy may be in you and your joy may be complete. 
    12: This is my commandment: love one another as I love you. 
    13: No one has greater love than this, to lay down one’s life for one’s friends. 
    14: 
    15: The Vine and the Branches. 1 “I am the true vine,[b] and my Father is the vine grower. 2 He takes away every branch in me that does not bear fruit, and every one that does he prunes[c] so that it bears more fruit. 3 You are already pruned because of the word that I spoke to you. 4 Remain in me, as I remain in you. Just as a branch cannot bear fruit on its own unless it remains on the vine, so neither can you unless you remain in me. 5 I am the vine, you are the branches. Whoever remains in me and I in him will bear much fruit, because without me you can do nothing. 6 [d]Anyone who does not remain in me will be thrown out like a branch and wither; people will gather them and throw them into a fire and they will be burned. 7 If you remain in me and my words remain in you, ask for whatever you want and it will be done for you. 8 By this is my Father glorified, that you bear much fruit and become my disciples. 9 As the Father loves me, so I also love you. Remain in my love. 10 If you keep my commandments, you will remain in my love, just as I have kept my Father’s commandments and remain in his love.
11 “I have told you this so that my joy may be in you and your joy may be complete. 12 This is my commandment: love one another as I love you. 13 [e]No one has greater love than this, to lay down one’s life for one’s friends. 14 You are my friends if you do what I command you. 15 I no longer call you slaves, because a slave does not know what his master is doing. I have called you friends,[f] because I have told you everything I have heard from my Father. 
    16: It was not you who chose me, but I who chose you and appointed you to go and bear fruit that will remain, so that whatever you ask the Father in my name he may give you. 
    17: This I command you: love one another.
The World’s Hatred. 
    18: “If the world hates you, realize that it hated me first. 
    19: If you belonged to the world, the world would love its own; but because you do not belong to the world, and I have chosen you out of the world, the world hates you. 
    20: Remember the word I spoke to you, ‘No slave is greater than his master.’ If they persecuted me, they will also persecute you. If they kept my word, they will also keep yours. 
    21: And they will do all these things to you on account of my name, because they do not know the one who sent me. 
    22: If I had not come and spoken to them, they would have no sin; but as it is they have no excuse for their sin. 
    23: Whoever hates me also hates my Father. 
    24: If I had not done works among them that no one else ever did, they would not have sin; but as it is, they have seen and hated both me and my Father. 
    25: But in order that the word written in their law might be fulfilled, ‘They hated me without cause.’

    26: “When the Advocate comes whom I will send you from the Father, the Spirit of truth that proceeds from the Father, he will testify to me. 
    27: And you also testify, because you have been with me from the beginning.


  Chapter 16.

    1: 
1 “I have told you this so that you may not fall away. 
    2: They will expel you from the synagogues; in fact, the hour is coming when everyone who kills you will think he is offering worship to God. 
    3: They will do this because they have not known either the Father or me. 
    4: I have told you this so that when their hour comes you may remember that I told you.
Jesus’ Departure; Coming of the Advocate. “I did not tell you this from the beginning, because I was with you. 
    5: 
    6: 1 “I have told you this so that you may not fall away. 2 They will expel you from the synagogues; in fact, the hour is coming when everyone who kills you will think he is offering worship to God. 3 They will do this because they have not known either the Father or me. 4 I have told you this so that when their hour comes you may remember that I told you.
Jesus’ Departure; Coming of the Advocate.[b] “I did not tell you this from the beginning, because I was with you. 5 But now I am going to the one who sent me, and not one of you asks me,[c] ‘Where are you going?’ 6 But because I told you this, grief has filled your hearts. 
    7: But I tell you the truth, it is better for you that I go. For if I do not go, the Advocate will not come to you. But if I go, I will send him to you. 
    8: And when he comes he will convict the world in regard to sin and righteousness and condemnation: 
    9: in, because they do not believe in me; 
    10: righteousness, because I am going to the Father and you will no longer see me; 
    11: condemnation, because the ruler of this world has been condemned.

    12: “I have much more to tell you, but you cannot bear it now. 
    13: But when he comes, the Spirit of truth, he will guide you to all truth. He will not speak on his own, but he will speak what he hears, and will declare to you the things that are coming. 
    14: He will glorify me, because he will take from what is mine and declare it to you. 
    15: 
    16: 1 “I have told you this so that you may not fall away. 2 They will expel you from the synagogues; in fact, the hour is coming when everyone who kills you will think he is offering worship to God. 3 They will do this because they have not known either the Father or me. 4 I have told you this so that when their hour comes you may remember that I told you.
Jesus’ Departure; Coming of the Advocate.[b] “I did not tell you this from the beginning, because I was with you. 5 But now I am going to the one who sent me, and not one of you asks me,[c] ‘Where are you going?’ 6 But because I told you this, grief has filled your hearts. 7 But I tell you the truth, it is better for you that I go. For if I do not go, the Advocate will not come to you. But if I go, I will send him to you. 8 [d]And when he comes he will convict the world in regard to sin and righteousness and condemnation: 9 sin, because they do not believe in me; 10 righteousness, because I am going to the Father and you will no longer see me; 11 condemnation, because the ruler of this world has been condemned.
12 “I have much more to tell you, but you cannot bear it now. 13 [e]But when he comes, the Spirit of truth, he will guide you to all truth. He will not speak on his own, but he will speak what he hears, and will declare to you the things that are coming. 14 He will glorify me, because he will take from what is mine and declare it to you. 15 Everything that the Father has is mine; for this reason I told you that he will take from what is mine and declare it to you.
16 “A little while and you will no longer see me, and again a little while later and you will see me.” 
    17: So some of his disciples said to one another, “What does this mean that he is saying to us, ‘A little while and you will not see me, and again a little while and you will see me,’ and ‘Because I am going to the Father’?” 
    18: So they said, “What is this ‘little while’ ? We do not know what he means.” 
    19: Jesus knew that they wanted to ask him, so he said to them, “Are you discussing with one another what I said, ‘A little while and you will not see me, and again a little while and you will see me’? 
    20: Amen, amen, I say to you, you will weep and mourn, while the world rejoices; you will grieve, but your grief will become joy. 
    21: When a woman is in labor, she is in anguish because her hour has arrived; but when she has given birth to a child, she no longer remembers the pain because of her joy that a child has been born into the world. 
    22: So you also are now in anguish. But I will see you again, and your hearts will rejoice, and no one will take your joy away from you. 
    23: On that day you will not question me about anything. Amen, amen, I say to you, whatever you ask the Father in my name he will give you. 
    24: Until now you have not asked anything in my name; ask and you will receive, so that your joy may be complete.

    25: “I have told you this in figures of speech. The hour is coming when I will no longer speak to you in figures but I will tell you clearly about the Father. 
    26: On that day you will ask in my name, and I do not tell you that I will ask the Father for you. 
    27: For the Father himself loves you, because you have loved me and have come to believe that I came from God. 
    28: I came from the Father and have come into the world. Now I am leaving the world and going back to the Father.” 
    29: His disciples said, “Now you are talking plainly, and not in any figure of speech. 
    30: Now we realize that you know everything and that you do not need to have anyone question you. Because of this we believe that you came from God.” 
    31: Jesus answered them, “Do you believe now? 
    32: Behold, the hour is coming and has arrived when each of you will be scattered to his own home and you will leave me alone. But I am not alone, because the Father is with me. 
    33: I have told you this so that you might have peace in me. In the world you will have trouble, but take courage, I have conquered the world.”


End of day 303.